
WALK TO BE THE KNOWER
 LIFE OF THE BUDDHA

 What did the Buddha teach .

 Hand book of Vipassana Meditation.

 At Wat Tam Wua Forest Monastery.

                            Contents
forward
          PART 1. Life of the Buddha                                1
    1.1) His Promise to Take Birth in the Human Realm               1
    1.2.) Queen Maya's Dream                                        2
    1.3) Birth of the Buddha                                        4
    1.4) A Youth Dedicated to the Mastery of Learning and Athletics 7
    1.5) The Skillful Conduct of Worldly Affairs                    8
    1.6) The Renunciation of Worldly Life                           9
    1.7) The Four Encounters                                        10
    1.8) The Six Years of Austerities                               13
    1.9) The Defeat of Mara                                         17
    1.10) The Enlightenment of the World                            18
    1.11) The descent from Trayatrimsa Heaven                       21
    1.12) The Passage into Parinirvana                              22

      PART 2: What did the Buddha teach.                           26
2.1 ) The Triple Gems                                              29
2.2 ) The four noble truths                                        31
2.3 ) Noble Eight fold Paths                                       34
2.4 ) Three areas of training                                      36
      2.4.1 ) Training in Morality                                 37
      2.4.2 ) Training in Mentality ( concentration)               39
      2.4.3 )Training in Wisdom                                    49
2.5 ) Maha Satipahna Sutta                                      59
      2.5.1) Mindfulness of the body ( Kynupassan)              59
      2.5.2) Mindfulness of feelings ( Vedannupassan )           62
      2.5.3 ) Mindfulness of the Mind ( Cittnupassan )           63
      2.5.4 ) Mindfulness of theMental-Quality ( Dhammnupassan ) 64
      PART THREE : practice meditation                             66

3.1) Tools for Practicing Dhamma                                   67
3.2) Samatha and Vipassana Meditation                              69

      3.2.1) The differentiation between Samatha and Vipassana           69
3.3 ) Foundation of Mindfulness                                          72
3.4) The purpose of Samatha and Vipassana                                76
3.5) Two kinds of Samadhi                                                78
3.6 ) Practicing Mindfulness in Daily life                               84
3.7) Feel your entire body                                               90
      3.7.1 ) How to feel your entire body                               91
      3.7.2. Feel your body through holistic observation                 92
3.8) Walking Meditation: the best mindfulness practice                   93
3.9 ) How to awareness of the mind                                       100
3.10 ) Process of Practicing Vipassana                                   105
      3.10.1 ) STEP 1 ) Practice Samatha Concentration                   106
      3.10.2 ) STEP 2) Practice Vipassana "The knower"                   109
      3.10.3 ) STEP 3 ) Practice " Stable mind "                         114
      3.10.4) STEP 4 ) Practice separation of matter and mind            123
      3.10.5 ) STEP 5) See the three characteristics of the Khandha 124
3.11 ) Disenchantment and discernment of the truth of unsubstantial nature
the truth of unsubstantial nature                                        128
3.12 ) Neutrality to conditioned states                                  129

3.13 ) Mindfulness of mind may alternate between concentration
      and insight meditation                                        129
3.14 ) To advance from common objects of consciousness
to refined state of void                                            133
3.15 ) To let go of the void mind and reach the ultimate reality    135
3.16 ) To attain the first stage of Enlightenment, the Stream-Entry 136

3.17 ) Attainment of the Eye of Truth                               139

3.18 ) Realization of Nibbna                                       140

3.19 ) Successive Steps of Vipassana Knowledge                      143

3.20) Conclusion for practicing Vipassana Meditation                146

3.21 ) Glossary                                                     149

PART FOUR : ABOUT WAT PA TAM WUA FOREST 151
MONASTERY

REFERENCE WORKS IN THAI                                             158

REFERENCE WORKS IN ENGLISH                                          158

                           ------------------------

                          Forward

       The term " the knower" is the very common in the Thai forest monks
tradition as well as the term " Bud-dho " which means " The knower, the
awakening and the blossom one." And it's the result from the second type
of Samadhi ( Characteristic-examination) which is stable and essential for
seeing the truth ,or seeing the three characteristic of the existence of the body
and mind.
       " Walk to be the knower" is the way to practice meditation with the right
concentration to wake our mind up out of the world of thought and fabrication.
This book is based on the teaching of Luang pu Dulya Atulo which was a famous
disciple of Luang pu Mun Purithatto . His Teaching was emphasized in awareness
the mind. Every things happen in the mind first and then turn to actions.
"The knower" is the quality of our mind that separate the mind from all of
defilements, and finally it will free itself from the five khandhas or matter and
mind. After we return everything to the nature ,we will receive the greatest gift
available to any being. Nirvana is complete liberation, weightless, and released

from any desire, with no more attachment, no more struggle, and never again
delude. The mind is untouchable: nothing can ever come in, take over the mind
and make it suffer ever again.
       Many foreigners came to Wat Pa Tam Wua to practice meditation and
don't know the second kind of Samadhi( the knower). And some are know
nothing about Buddhism ,either. So this book is appropriate to both the new
beginning and anyone who practicing in the advance level.
       This book have four parts, the first part is about the life of the Buddha which
all of the pictures are from the paintings from Ajahn Krissana Suriyakarn in the
book "Prathom Somphotikhata", the second parts is about the Dhamma and
the third part is about the practice Vipassana meditation, and the last is about
Wat Tam Wua Forest monastery. The purpose of this book is only be the guide
line for the foreigners to gain more understanding about the practicing
Vipassana Meditation and the Buddhism.
                                         Phra Anek Thanissarapoti


                                    1


      PART 1:) Life of the Buddha
Gautama Buddha , the historical Buddha, lived between 563 and 483 BC in
the area known as the Indo - Nepalese region. As a bodhisatta, he had passed
through thousands of existences before coming to the earth for the ultimate
transmigration.
      1.1) His Promise to Take Birth in the Human Realm
                                                Before the Buddha was born
                                                into this world as
                                                Shakyamuni, he was a
                                                bodhisattva in the Tushita
                                                heaven (home of the
                                                contented gods). His name
                                                there was Shvetaketu
                                                ("White Banner"). From
                                                here he witnessed the dark
                                                ages engulfing the human
                                                realm, leading to its spiritual
                                               impoverishment. Moved to

                                          2


compassion like a true bodhisattva, he vowed to manifest himself in the sentient
world and relieve people from their sufferings.

      Indeed, in strictly canonical terms, a bodhisattva is defined as an
individual who discovers the source of the Ultimate Truth better known as
Nirvana, but postpones his own enlightenment until he has guided all his fellow
beings to this same source of fulfillment. Thus, Buddha, looking down upon the
sentient beings suffering in the throes of ignorance, felt a pang of compassion,
and in accordance with his bodhisattva status, decided to descend to the earth
and spread the word of Dharma. Visually, Buddha is depicted making this vow
surrounded by other sacred beings, holding aloft a lotus flower in his right hand,
symbolizing the purity of his intention

      1.2.) Queen Maya's Dream

The Lalitavistara (1st cent. AD) says that Buddha himself selected the time,
place, and caste of his birth. He finally short listed King Shudhodhana and his
wife, Queen Mayadevi, rulers of the Shakya (Lion) clan, as his future parents.
This generous couple was well known throughout the land for their just and
noble bearing. Scriptures assert that Buddha chose a king as his father since the
royal caste was more respected that the priestly one. It indeed seems strange that

                                       3


                                                          the Buddha, who never
                                                         believed in the caste
                                                         system, was so
                                                         particular in the choice
                                                         of a Brahmin or
                                                         Kshatriya family for
                                                         his own birth. In fact, it
                                                         was precisely to show
                                                         the futility of the
                                                         notion of high-birth as
                                                         an aid in spiritual
                                                         salvation that this
                                                       choice was made.

The bodhisattva's descent from the Tushita heaven occurred as a dream to
Mayadevi. In this dream, a white elephant approached and touched her right
side with its trunk. Through this symbolic act, the bodhisattva entered the womb
of Mayadevi and impregnated her.

                                          4


The choice of an elephant as a symbol of her impregnation is a well-thought out
metaphor because elephants are known for their strength and intelligence, and
also associated with gray-rain clouds and thus with fertility, since rainwater
means that seeds will germinate and vegetables will be able to grow. The white
color (of the elephant), adds to this an element of purity and immaculacy. The
royal fortunetellers explained that the dream announced the queen's pregnancy,
                                                       and that the newborn
                                                       would possess exceptional
                                                       traits.

                                                       1.3).Birth of the Buddha
                                                       Mayadevi had successfully
                                                       carried the Buddha-to-Be
                                                       for ten months without any
                                                       complications or pain.
                                                       Near the end of her
                                                       pregnancy, she took a trip
                                                       to her parental home to
                                                      have the baby there with

                                           5


her mother, an ancient custom that is still sometimes practiced. On the way
however there was a pleasant grove, overflowing with a rich profusion of fruits
and flowers. Desiring to rest among them, the queen instructed her party to put
camp there. She stepped out of her palanquin and reached to grasp one of the
branches of a flowering tree. No sooner had she done so than she felt the throes
of giving birth. Standing thus, with her hand to the branch, she delivered, and
the Buddha-to-Be emerged from his mother. He immediately walked, spoke,
and was received by Brahma.

      Five days after his birth , the young prince received the name
"Siddhartha" . When his parents took him to the temple, the statues of the
Gods prostrated themselves before him, great were the rejoicings of the people
over the birth of this illustrious prince. Also at this time a devout old man name
Asita came down from the Himalayas to meet the new born prince. An ascetic
of high spiritual attainments, Asita was particularly pleased to hear this happy
news. Having been a tutor to the king, he visited the palace to see the royal
baby. The King ,who felt honored by his un expected visit, carried the child up
to him in order to make the child pay him due reverence. To the surprise of all,
the child's legs turned and rested on the matted locks of the ascetic.

                                         6


                                                             Instantly , the ascetic
                                                             rose from the seat
                                                             and recognizing in
                                                             the young child the
                                                             80 signs that are
                                                             pledges to a highly
                                                             religious vocation,
                                                             and foreseeing with
                                                             his supernormal
                                                             vision the child's
                                                             future greatness,
                                                             saluted him with
                                                             clasped hands. The
                                                          Royal father did
likewise. The great ascetic smiled at first and then was sad. Questioned
regarding his mingled feelings, he answered that he smiled because the prince
would eventually become a Buddha , an Enlightened One, and he was sad
because he would not be able to benefit from the superior wisdom of the
Enlightened One owing to his prior death and rebirth in a Formless plane.

                                      7


      1.4) A Youth Dedicated to the Mastery of Learning and Athletics

Seven days after giving birth Mayadevi died, and her sister Mahaprajapati
raised the prince. When the young prince was in his twelfth year, the king
called the wise Brahmans in council. They revealed that Siddhartha devote
                                                        himself to asceticism if
                                                          he cast his eyes on
                                                          aged, sickness , or
                                                          death -and, if he were
                                                          to meet a hermit.

                                                          As the son of the
                                                          king, Siddhartha was
                                                          provided with the
                                                          finest upbringing. His
                                                          life had ample
                                                          quantities of both
                                                          opportunity and
                                                          security. He received
                                                          the finest education

                                         8


and mastered all lessons taught to him. In his younger years, he excelled in
sports and other contests of skill. The vigorous training befitted the grooming of
a future monarch. He was said to particularly excel on the horse and with the
bow.

      1.5) The Skillful Conduct of Worldly Affairs

When he came of age and assumed royal duties, prince Siddhartha became a
                                                           true man of the world
                                                           and had a retinue of
                                                           many queens and
                                                           attendant ladies.. And
                                                           then the King made a
                                                           ceremony for
                                                           wedding, The most
                                                           beautiful princess in
                                                           the land, Yasodhara ,
                                                           was found for his
                                                           bride, and after
                                                           Siddhartha proved

                                         9


himself in many tournaments calling for strength and powers, when he was 16,
the two were wed.

      1.6) The Renunciation of Worldly Life

Grief-stricken at the idea of losing his son, the King doubled the guard around
the walls and increased the pleasures and distractions within. And at this point,
Yasodhara born him a son whom he called Rahula ( meaning " chain"), a name
                                                     that indicated Gautama's
                                                       sense of dissatisfaction
                                                       with his life of luxury,
                                                       while the birth of his son
                                                       evoked in him much
                                                       tenderness. His apparent
                                                       sense of dissatisfaction
                                                       turned to disillusion when
                                                       he saw three things, an old
                                                       man, a diseased man.

                                          10


1.7) The Four Encounters

Having been warned by the court astrologers that his son may well give it all up
and choose the path of meditation, Buddha's father tried his best to shield him
from the harsh realities of life. This state of affairs continued until one day, by
chance, while riding his chariot, Siddhartha encountered an old man walking
along the road. Intrigued by his first encounter with old age, the prince
addressed his charioteer: "Who is this man there with the white hair, feeble
hand gripping a staff, eyes lost beneath his brows, limbs bent and hanging
loose? Has something happened to alter him, or is that his natural state?"

"That is old age," said the charioteer, "the ravisher of beauty, the ruin of vigor,
the cause of sorrow, destroyer of delights, the bane of memories and the enemy
of the senses. In his childhood, that one too drank milk and learned to creep
along the floor, came step by step to vigorous youth, and he has now, step by
step, in the same way, gone on to old age."

The charioteer thus revealed in his simplicity what was to have been hidden
from the king's son, who exclaimed, "What! And will this evil come to me too?"

"Without doubt, by the force of time," said the charioteer.

                                        11


And thus the great soul one, whose mind was but a store of merits, was agitated
when he heard of old age - like a bull who has heard close by the crash of a
thunderbolt. He further encountered in such manner a sick man and a dead man,
leading to great turbulence in his mind.

One day he came across an ascetic mendicant. "Who art thou?" he asked. To
which the other answered, "Terrified by birth and death, desiring liberation, I
                                                      became an ascetic. As a
                                                        beggar, wandering
                                                        without family and
                                                        without hope, accepting
                                                        any fare, I live now for
                                                        nothing but the highest
                                                        good." Convinced that
                                                        herein lay the way to
                                                        quell his mental
                                                        agitation, Gautama
                                                        resolved to follow this
                                                        holy man's example.

                                          12


       Gautama left the luxurious palace of his father in the middle of the night,
leaving behind his sleeping wife and son. The first thing Gautama Buddha did
after leaving his father's palace was to severe his long and beautiful hair with his
princely blade. He thought, "These locks of mine are not suited to a monk; but
there is no one to cut the hair of a future Buddha. Therefore I will cut them off
myself with my sword." And grasping a scimitar with his right hand, he seized
his top-knot with his left hand, and cut it off, together with his jeweled turban.
                                                  His hair thus became two finger-
                                                    breadths in length, and curling
                                                    to the right, lay close to his
                                                    head. Taking hold of his top-
                                                    knot and diadem, he threw
                                                    them into the air, saying: "If I
                                                    am to become a Buddha, let
                                                    them stay in the sky; but if not,
                                                    let them fall to the ground."
                                                    They rose into the air for a
                                                    distance of one league before

                                       13


Vasava (corresponding to the Indra), the chief of gods, perceiving them with his
divine eyes, received them in an appropriate jeweled casket, and established
them in heaven. "His hair he cut, so sweet with many pleasant scents, This
Chief of men, and high impelled it towards the sky; And there god Vasava, the
god with a thousand eyes, In golden casket caught it, bowing low his head."



                                                          1.8) The Six Years
                                                          of Austerities

                                                          For many years,
                                                          Gautama studied the
                                                          doctrines until, having
                                                          felt the need to learn
                                                          more elsewhere , he
                                                          traveled and fasted.
                                                          His two teachers had
                                                          showed him how to
                                                          reach very deep states
                                                          of meditation

                                          14


( samadhi) . This did not, however, lead to a sense of true knowledge or peace,
and the practice of deep meditation was abandoned in favor of a life of extreme
asceticism which he shared with five companions. But again, after five or six
years of self-mortification,

             Wandering in his search for enlightenment, Buddha came to a
pleasant hermitage by a lovely stream, where, for six years, he joined five
mendicants in a way of discipline based on progressively severe fasting. He ate
a single grain of rice for each of the first two years, drank a single drop of water
for each of the second two years, and took nothing at all during the last two.
Consequently, his bones stuck out like a row of spindles, and when he touched
his stomach, he could almost feel his spine. His hair fell out and his skin
became withered. His body had become terribly wasted - it was little more than
loose flesh hanging on protruding bones. He had not cut his hair or beard in six
months, and when he rubbed his head, handful of hair fell out .

But all this was in vain. However severe his austerities, perhaps even because of
them, the body still clamored for attention, and he was still plagued by material
craving. In fact, he seemed more conscious of himself than ever. Buddha had to
face the fact that asceticism had failed to redeem him. All he had achieved after

                                       15


this heroic assault upon his body was a prominent rib cage, and a dangerously
weakened physique. Siddharta felt he had failed to achieve true insight and
rejected such practices as dangerous and useless.



       Discovering that
excessive fasts destroy strength
, he leaned that as he had
transcended earthly life, so
much he next transcend
asceticism. Alone and weak ,
he sat beneath the sacred Bodhi
tree of wisdom, and swore to
die before arising without the
wisdom he sought.

       Finally, it dawned upon him that physical austerity is one of the two
extremes, and that the 'Middle Way between these two extremes is the path to
enlightenment.' He thus slowly rose, and went to bathe in the stream.

                                         16


He crossed over to the far bank where he met a village girl named Sujata who
offered him a bowl of rice pudding (kheer). It was the first food he had accepted
in years and it instantly restored his body to lustrous good health.

      Resolved to continued his quest, Siddharta made his way to a deer park at
Isipatana, near present day Benares. Here he sat beneath a tree meditation on
death and rebirth. Thus nourished, and accompanied solely by his own resolve,
Siddhartha strode majestically towards the bodhi tree, to make his last bid for
liberation. Abandoning himself to meditation, he vowed not to move from that
spot until he had attained full enlightenment. He return to himself to learn from
his success and failures. He did not hesitate to let meditation nourish his mind
and body, and the sense of peace and ease grew within him.He did not distance
himself or try to escape his feelings and perceptions, but maintain mindfulness
in order to observe them as they arose. He abandoned the desire to escape the
world of phenomena .

                                      17


1.9) The Defeat of Mara

                                                        Hearing this solemn
                                                        vow, Mara, the
                                                        Buddhist manifestation
                                                        of death and desire,
                                                        felt threatened. Mara's
                                                        power over sentient
                                                        beings originated from
                                                        their attachment to
                                                        sensuous pleasures and
                                                        the consequent fear of
                                                        death which lead to
                                                        intense suffering.
                                                      Enlightenment would
free Siddhartha from Mara's control and provide an opportunity for others to
free themselves also by emulating him. Likewise, Mara first sent his three
beautiful daughters named Desire (Future), Fulfillment (Present), and Regret
(Past). The Buddha had already disengaged himself from these pinnings and

                                         18


thus remained unmoved. This prompted Mara to intimidate the venerable one by
installing fear in his heart. Towards this end he generated an army of wrathful
and hideous creatures, the very personifications of death. But all through the
tribulations, Buddha sat calm and unflinching, and Mara had no other recourse
than to withdraw, and thus was cleared the final hurdle on the way to Buddha's
enlightenment.

                                                              1.10) The
                                                         Enlightenment of the
                                                         World

                                                               It was here that
                                                         Siddhartta attained a
                                                         knowledge of the way
                                                         things are, it was
                                                         through this knowledge
                                                         that he acquired the title
                                                         Buddha ( meaning "
                                                         awakening one") . This
                                                         awakening was

                                          19


achieved during a night of meditation, which passed through various stages as
the illumination that Gautama had sought slowly welled up in his heart. He
knew the exact condition of all beings and the cause of their rebirths. He saw
beings live, die and transmigrate. In meditation of human pain, he was
enlightened about both its genesis and the means of destroying it.

       In this first stage he saw each of his previous existences, and then
understood the chain of cause and effect . In the second he surveyed the death
                                                        and the rebirth of all living
                                                       beings and understood the
                                                       law that governs the cycle
                                                       of birth and death. In the
                                                       third he identified the Four
                                                       Noble Truths: the
                                                       universality of suffering,
                                                       the cause of suffering
                                                       through selfish desire, the
                                                       solution and the way to
                                                       overcome suffering. This

                                         20


final point is called the Noble Eightfold Path , this being eight steps consisting
of wisdom ( right views, right intention) ethics ( right speech , right action, right
livelihood), mental discipline ( right effort, right mindfulness, right
concentration) , which lead to liberation from the source of suffering.

      When day came, Gautama had attained perfect illumination , and had
become a Buddha. The rays emanating from his body shone to the boundaries of
space. He stayed in meditation for seven more days, and then for four more
                                                         weeks he stayed by the
                                                        tree.

                                                               Having gained
                                                        enlightenment, Gautama
                                                        came to be called
                                                        Shakyamuni, or the silent
                                                        lion, indicating the
                                                        explosive potential he
                                                        carried within himself. He
                                                        first went up to Sarnath
                                                        near Varanasi where he

                                      21


met the five disciples with whom he had previously traversed the path of
asceticism. Though they had deserted him after their failed experiment, the
unearthly glow from his body now attracted them. Hearing his discourse, they
became his first followers.



                                                               1.11) The
                                                         Descent from the
                                                         Trayatrimsa Heaven

                                                         Queen Maya, after her
                                                         death, was said to have
                                                         been reborn in the
                                                         Trayatrimsa heaven.
                                                         Having attained
                                                         enlightenment, Buddha
                                                         decided to ascend to
                                                         the Trayatrimsa
                                                         heaven, literally the
                                                        heaven of thirty-three

                                         22


gods, to visit his mother. The name 'thirty-three' derives from the fact that it is
the residence of the 33 gods of Hinduism, an ancient notion, having roots in
Vedic thought. With three strides Buddha reached the heaven, where he
preached before the divine congregation, including his mother, for several
months.

When the inhabitants of the earth fervently supplicated him to return, Buddha
coasted downwards with the help of a ladder that had thirty-three rungs,
handcrafted by the divine architect Vishwakarma. This descent is the most
celebrated event of the entire episode and is often glorified in independent
artworks.

1.12) The Passage into Parinirvana

Traveling great distances to disseminate his teachings, Buddha finally reached
the city of Kushinagara, where he asked his disciples to spread a couch for him
in a grove. He lay there, reclining on his right side, facing west, with his head
supported by his hand.

       Growing weaker, he said that," Do not say we have no master now. The
doctrine I have preached will be your master when I have disappeared . Listen,

                                        23


I beg you : ALL CREATIONS ARE IMPERMANENT; work diligently for your
liberation," And after this he gave the last words

" Beware Bhikkhus! I warn you thus" " All concocted things disintegrate"

"You ought always to be carefully alert"

" These are the finals words of Tathagata"

                                                        Having pronounced
                                                        these final words,
                                                        Buddha went into the
                                                        Jhana stages, or
                                                        meditative
                                                        absorptions. Going
                                                        from level to level,
                                                        one after the other ,

                                         24


Then the Buddha entered the first jhana. Leaving that, he entered the second,the
third, the fourth jhana , then he successively entered the sphere of Infinite space,
the sphere of Infinite consciousness , the sphere of nothingness , the spher of
neither -Perception-Nor-Non -Perception. Then he attained the Cessation of
fellingband perception and then he did this process it again one time but stop at
the fourth jhana . Then he came out of the meditative absorption for the last
time and passed into nirvana , leaving nothing whatever behind that can cause
rebirth again in this or any other world, and finally passed into Nirvana. After
his death, Buddha 's remains were cremated, as became the Buddhist tradition.
The passing away, or the final Nirvana, of the Buddha occurred in 483 BC on a
full moon in the month of May, known in the Indian calendar as Wesak. And
its the same day that the Buddha born , became Enlightenment and Final
Pariniravana. So we called this day Wesak Day which is recognized as the day
of the buddha's birthday, enlightenment, and nirvana which miraculously
occured on the same day.

25

                                      26


            PART 2: What did the buddha teach.
      At present, Buddhism continues to gain an ever-widening acceptance in
countries and societies far beyond its original home. Many people throughout
the world , through their own careful choice, are adopting Buddhism 's
peacefully , compassionate and reasonable ways as guiding principles in their
lives. Buddhism is not a belief system. It's not about accepting certain
tenets or believing a set of claims       or principles. In fact , it's quite the
opposite. It's about examining the world clearly and carefully about
testing everything and every idea. Buddhism is about seeing. It's about
knowing rather than believing or hoping or wishing .It's also about not
being afraid to examine anything and everything .
      Eighty years before the commencement of the Buddhist Era, a great man
was born into the world. He was the son of king Suddhodana and Queen Siri
MahaMaya of Sakka country which is now within the boundaries of Nepal.His
name was "Siddhatha."
      Thirty  five   years   later, Prince   Siddhatha      attained    Supreme
Enlightenment and thereafter became known as the " Enlightened One " or
the "Lord buddha " as he is called in Thai . He proclamed his Dhamma or
Universal thruth to the people,and there after ,the buddhist religion( the
teaching of the Buddha) and the Buddhist community of disciples came

                                      27


into existence. The community was composed of bhikkus or monks (
including  samaneras    of  male   novices),  bhikkunis  or nuns ( including
samaneris or female novices ) upasakas or male lay folowers and upasikas
or female lay followers.
      At present in Thailand , we have only monks and novices, upasakas
or Buddhist layman and upasikas or Buddhist laywomen. A monk who
has been ordained and Conduct himself in accordance with the precepts
laid down for the monk. A novice is a person under or over 20 years of
age who has been ordained and conducts himself in accordance with the
precepts laid down for a novice . A buddhist layman or laywoman is one
who has taken refuge in the Triple Gem, i.e. the Buddha , the Dhamma
and the Sangha, and observes the precepts applicable to layman and
laywoman.
      At present we call laymen and laywomen , whether of age or under
age, " Buddhamamaka" and " Buddhamamika " respectively , meaning " he
or she who believes in Buddha"
      Buddhism has spread from its place of birth into the various
country of the world. Buddhism is more of a field of study than it is a
religion. In practicing , we are taught to rely on ourselves, and not on
higher entities or nothing external to ourselves. To practice Buddhism , we

                                   28


must study ; we must be an observer. We observe ourselves much in the
way a researcher    who has a field of study observes his subject. The
subject of our field of study here is our body and our mind , our
objective is to see the true characteristics of them in        our own
experience. We must be the one to study our body and mind, no one else
can do it for us.
      Buddhism believes in the potential of human being to be able to
observe oneself and see Truth. Seeing the truth of the way things really
are is called seeing Dhamma. Once a human beings sees the truth or
sees Dhamma , he or she be free from suffering.
      The focal point of worship in Buddhism is the Ti-Ratana ( the triple
Gem) namely the buddha who by himself discovered, and proclaimed the
Dhamma, Thereby establishing the     buddhist religion, the Dhamma (
Universal Truth discovered, realized and proclaimed by the Buddha and
the Sangha or community of those who hear, follow and realized the
Buddha's Teachings. Some members or the Sangha become monks and
help in the dissemination of Buddhism and the perpetuation of the
monkhood up to the present time.

                                      29


      2.1 ) The Triple Gem: the three refuge which are
Buddha :The knowing .Awakened , Fully Blossomed One , especially the
perfectly Self -Awakened One ( sammasambhuddha)Specially , buddha refers
to the historical prophet under whom Buddhism was founded, otherwise
refered to as Bhagava( Blessed One) by followers and samana Gotama by
others. The   primary  quality   of  a buddha     are wisdom     ,purity , and
compassion.
Dhamma :Truth, nature, law , order ,duty, The secret of nature which must
be understood in order to develop life to the highest possible purpose and
benefit .
Sangha: Community : the      community      of  the  buddha's followers   who
practice thoroughly , directly , insightfully , and correctly. Sangha include
lay women, lay men , nuns, and monks.
      Everyone who is initiated into the Buddhist religion , whether a
layman or a monk, ought to conform to a preliminary rule , namely one
must Solemnly promise to take refuge in and accept the Triple Gem as
one's refuge or, in other words, to regard the Buddha as one's father who
give birth to one's spiritual life. A Buddhist may associate himself        or
herself with people of other faiths and pay respect to objects of the

                                     30


reverence of the religions in an appropriate    manner in the same way as
he or she may pay respect to the father , mother or elders of other
people while having at the same time his or her own father. He will not
lose his Buddhist religion as long as he believes in the Triple Gem, just
as he will remain the son of his own father as long as his father
instead, or just as he will remain a Thai as long as he does not adopt
another nationality.
      Buddhism , therefore , is not intolerant. Its followers may at will
associate with people of other nationalities and religions. Buddhism does
not teach disrespectfulness to anyone. On the contrary, it declares that
respect should be paid to all those to whom respect is due and that
Dhamma should not be withheld from the knowledge of others and kept
only to oneself. Whoever desires to study and practice the Dhamma may
do so without having to profess first the Buddhist faith . The Dhamma as
proclaimed by Buddhist religion, will help to demonstrate that it is " truth"
that will beneficial and bring happiness in the present life.
      The essence of the entire Buddhist teachings lies in the Four Noble
Truth.
      Noble Truth is short for " Truth for the Noble one"

                                     31


      It should first be understood that it is not simply truth that is
agreeable to the world or to oneself, but truth that is directly born from
wisdom.
      2.2 ) The four noble truths
      The four noble truth are :-
            2.2.1. Dukkha or suffering , which means birth, decay and
death which are the normal incidents of life. It also means sorrow.
lamentation, pain, grief and despair which are at times experienced by our
body and mind. To be seperated from the pleasant , to be disappointed, or
to be in contact with the unpleasant are also suffering. In short our body
and mind are subject to suffering or, in other words, we may say that
our existence is bound up with suffering.
            2.2.2. Samudaya , which means the cause of suffering, which
is desire. It is a compelling urge of mind, such as the longing to own
what we desire, to be what we desire to be , or to avoid those states to
which we feel aversion.
            2.2.3. Nirodha, which means cessation of suffering, which
cannotes extinction of desire or such longings of the mind.

                                     32


           2.2.4. Magga, which means the way to the cessation of
suffering,  which   is    the Noble   Eight   fold  Path,   namely      Right
Understanding, Right Intention, Right speech, Right action, Right livelihood,
Right Effort, Right Mindfulness and Right Concentration.
      Therefore, if one really understands that elimination of suffering is
nothing but keeping the mind at rest and that rest is a mental
nourishment   which   is   needed  every day ,  then  one   will   begin  to
understand the meaning of Nirodha.
      We should realize that when our mind is restless it is because of
desire . The mind then causes us to act , speak and think in consonance
with its agitated state . The gratified, it may became peaceful; but only
momentarily , because action dictated by a restless mind may very soon
afterwards bring us intense pain and severe punishment or make us
conscience stricken and cause us to regret it for a very long time . So let
it be known that a person with his mind in such a state is termed " slave
of desire"

                        33



             The Four Noble Thruths


Dukkha
            Samudhaya       Nirodha    Magga
Suffering



                                         Right View



                                       Right Thought



                                       Right Speech



                                        Right Action



                                       RightLivelihood



                                         Right Effort



                                           Right
                                        Mindfulness


                                           Right
                                       Concentration

                                     34


      2.3 ) Noble Eight fold Paths
            Then is there a way to overcome desire or to master the desire
on our own hearts? Yes, there is the Noble Eight fold Path that leads to
the extinction of suffering namely:
            2.3.1 ) Sammaditthi or Right View, meaning intellectualgrasp
of the Four Noble Truths or of the true natuer of existence even in a
simplified form as outlined in the preceding paragraphs.
            2.3.2. ) Sammasangkappa      or   Right   Thought   ,  meaning
intention to be free from all bonds of Dukkha. Such intention should be
free from revenge, hatred , and harmfulness.
            2.3.3 ). Sammavaca or Right Speech, Meaning absence from
lying; from tale- bearing and vicious talk that cause discord; from harsh
language; from vain , irresponsible and foolish talk.
            2.3.4. ) Sammakammanta or Right Action , meaning avoidance
of killing and torturing of theft and misappropriation , and of adultery.
            2.3.5. ) Sammaajiva or Right livelihood , meaning Rejection of
wrong means of livelihood and living by right Means.
            2.3.6.) Sammavayama or Right effort , meaning effort to
avoid the arising of evil; effort to over evil and demeritorious states that

                                    35


have already arisen; effort to develop good and beneficial states of mind,
and effort to maintain them when they have arisen.
            2.3.7. ) Sammasati or Right Mindfulness, meaning dwelling in
contemplation of the station of the mind, for instance , the Satipahattna
or four stations of Mindfulness which are the body, Sensation, Mind and
Dhamma.
            2.3.8.) Sammasamadhi or Right concentration, meaning the
fixing of the mind upon a single deed which we wish to perform along
the right path.
The Noble Eightfold Path is in reality one complete Path with eight
component parts which may by summed up in the stages of training
( sikkha ) namely :
Among these three fundamental modes of training , Sila . or morality is
first recommended for buddhist practice both on the personal level and
the social levels.

                                   36

              Three Areas Training

Morality ( Sila )                                        Coarse
                                                         Defilements
Right Speech
                                                         Greedy
Right Livelyhood                       V.S,
                                                         Anger
Right Action                                             Delusion

R
       Morality or ( sila ) to control strong defilements
                                                         Medium
Concentration                                            Defilements

Right Effort                                             5 Hindrances
                                       VS

Right Mindfulness                                        Dosa, lust,Asleep

                                                         dullness,frustrate,
Right
                                                         doubfulness
Concentration
       Concentration or Samadhi to control Medium defilements
wisdom                                                   Fined

Right View                                               Defilements

Right Thought                            VS              Ignorance




            wisdom to control fined defilements

                                        37


       2.4 ) Three areas of training
In learning Buddhism , the Buddha taught that there are three areas of training
(ti-sikkha): morality, mentality, and wisdom., There are very important to know
all of them.
             2.4.1 ) Training in Morality
                 2.4.1.1 ) Kinds of Morality
There are several levels of morality, but we may easily divide it into three
classes, as follows:
(a) Morality for good conduct;
(b) Morality for Dhamma practice
             a ) Morality for good conduct
These are abstinences of evils and misconduct by body and speech, e.g. the five
precepts, the eight precepts, the ten precepts and the 227 precepts. This type of
moral restraint arises from a firm resolution to refrain from bodily and verbal
misconduct. Observers of these precepts will enjoy a peaceful living in society
and save themselves from distraction. This level of morality is very necessary
for one who practices Dhamma. At least they should determinedly abstain from
five evils, e.g. killing and harming human beings and animals, harming and
doing violence to property of others, harming or doing violence to the beloved
and the highly valued of others,        e.g. their spouses and children, lying,

                                        38


slandering, using harsh    language, frivolous talking, and taking intoxicants,
which causes heedlessness and mindlessness.
             b) Morality for practicing Dhamma
       The Buddha taught ," When your eyes see from the world, liking and
disliking appear in the mind . Have the mindfulness to know when they do. If
you don't see the liking or disliking immediately, the mind will be burdened and
influenced by greed, aversion and ignorance." The mind will stray from its
normal state of purity and become immoral.          A mind without morality is
actually an abnormal mind. It has the mental defilements ( greed, aversion, etc.)
influencing it.
       This is sense-restraint (indriyasavara-sla), which is further developed
from morality for good conduct. It arises from      mindfulness, which protects
the mind from domination           by defilements when the eyes, ears, nose,
tongue, body and mind contact sense-objects. For example, when one sees a
wallet falling out of a man's pocket and craves for it, mindfulness will recollect
the craving. As the result, craving cannot dominate the mind. The mind will
remain calm and firm in its normal state. The mindful one will call the owner to
pick it up. Both will be happy at the end. Alternatively, when one is scolded
and gets angry, if mindfulness recollects anger, the mind will not be enraged by
anger. It will remain calm and firm as usual. There will be no quarrel, no
exchange of words or assault, etc. Sense-restraint is an effective instrument for

                                     39


developing mindfulness. Not only is it a moral rule, it is also conducive to
insight development through mindfulness of consciousness in everyday life.
For this reason, it is what a Dhamma practitioner should practice and observe
in everyday life.
             2.4.2 )The training in Mentality ( concentration)
The training of Concentration through meditation is the second fold of
trisikha. The pali word for meditation is bhavana, which literally means
"development, cultivation or culture" Since the practice has to do directly
with the mind , the word bhavana therefore refers specifically to a
process of mental culture or mental development .
      Buddhist meditation is essentially an experiential activity. It is a
means to mental development through practice, not a scholartic subject to
be understood through books. It deals particularly with the training of the
mind, which is the most important component of the entire human entity.
Because mind is a forerunner and prime source of all actions, be the
physical,  verbal    or mental, It need    to  be properly    cultivated and
developed. Meditation is the mental development in the real sense of the
term bhavana, for it's aim not only a temporary calm and tranquility of
mind, but also a purifying the mind of defilement and negative influence
, such as sensual desire, lust, hatred, jealous, envy, worry, ignorance,
restlessness. It cultivates and bring to perfection such wholesome and

                                          40


positive qualities of and as confidence, compassion, wisdom, energy,
mindfulness, concentration and penetrative insight.
                   2.4.2.1 ) Purpose of Training in Mentality
The purpose of this training is to develop concentration and moral
consciousness (mahkusala-citta) that is associated with wisdom and ready
to further comprehend the truths of Matter and Mind.
                   2.4.2.2 ) What to Study about Consciousness
Mental training is about learning our own mental states  which state of mind is
a virtuous one, which is not, which state of mind is suitable for Samatha
meditation, which for Vipassana, and which state of mind is unfit for any
practice at all. We need to know clearly the characteristics of each mental state.
This way, we can see which is the most appropriate practice at any given time.
Let's have a look at what types of mental states are virtuous and which are not.
Virtuous ones do not have desire, aversion or ignorance controlling them.
So if in any moment the mind is wanting, is in a state of anger or stress, is lost
in thought or in sense perception (looking, hearing, etc.) then it is surely not
a virtuous one in the Buddhist sense. This is an easy way to measure the quality
of the mind in any given moment. With that said, sometimes we can't tell if
the mind has desire, aversion or ignorance because they are there in such a
subtle form. In such cases, there are other ways to know. A truly virtuous mind
is a light one (lahuta). The arising of a weighty mind is a sure sign that we are

                                          41


faltering in our practice, that unscrupulousness or unwholesomeness
has come in to replace virtue. Some people's minds become so heavy in their
practice it is as if they are carrying a mountain on their shoulders. A virtuous
mind is also gentle and pliant (muduta). Any rigidity or dullness is not virtuous.
Some people have their minds held rigid all day long. A virtuous mind
must be agile and nimble (pagunnata). Be cautious and cognizant of such things.
We may notice that if we are too deliberate when we set our minds to practice,
there will arise heaviness, tightness, dullness or inattentiveness. Why is that? It
is because greed has entered. Wanting to practice is a form of greed. When we
want to meditate we bring the wanting into our practice and it will affect our
mind. Normally when the desire arises to meditate, we meditate. As such, our
actions are resulting from a state of mind that is defiled with desire, a non-
virtuous state. Heaviness, rigidity, inattentiveness and dullness will thus appear.
There will be no chance for a truly impartial mindfulness of inner phenomena to
occur. Genuine mindfulness cannot occur at that moment because the area has
already become a defiled one. Mindfulness can certainly never arise in
conjunction with a defilement. We can only have one or the other. Therefore, if
we are meditating and the mind is rigid or dull, know that this mental state has
arisen out of greed. Also when the rigidity and dullness arise, aversion will
follow because we want these states to go away. We don't like them and feel
confined and edgy. We want to be pleased, happy and comfortable. Once

                                        42


again, mental defilements prevail. So we must come to learn the qualities of
virtuous and non-virtuous mental states within ourselves.
There are two points, i.e. what type of consciousness is moral vs. what
kind is immoral; and what kind of mind is good for concentration
practice (samatha-bhvan) and what kind is good for insight development
(vipassan-bhvan). If a Dhamma practitioner does not study these matters
well, he or she may ignorantly develop immoral consciousness and
misunderstands that he or she is practicing Dhamma. Likewise, he or she may
mistakenly practice meditation (Samatha) and believes that it is a practice for
insight development (Vipassan).
                  2.4.2.3 ) Nature of Moral Consciousness
Moral consciousness must be associated with beautiful mental factors or
sobhaa cetasika. With such mental factors, consciousness is unblemished and
righteous. There are 25 types of beautiful mental factors (the Higher Doctrine
(Abhidhamma) refers to a mental factor (cetasika) as a mental state, like a state
of consciousness). These beautiful mental factors can be divided into 4 types,
as follows:
                  2.4.2.4 ) The beautiful mental factors that are common to
all moral consciousness (sobhaa-sdhraa cetasika) are of 19 types,
namely:

                                        43


(1) Saddh: faith, i.e. sensible belief which should conform to the teaching of
Lord Buddha;
(2) Sati: mindfulness, not noting as is widely translated at the later stage;
(3) Hiri: moral shame of an evil;
(4) Ottappa: moral dread of the outcome of an evil that will lead to suffering
and trouble;
(5) Alobha: non-greed or non-craving;
(6) Adosa: non-hatred or loving-kindness;
(7) Tatramajjhattat: specific neutrality of mind to a condition through
wisdom;
(8) Kya passaddhi: calmness of the mental factors, e.g. feeling;
(9) Citta-passaddhi: tranquility of mind;
(10) Kya-lahut: lightness of mental body;
(11) Citta-lahut: lightness of mind;
(12) Kya-mudut: pliancy of mental body;
(13) Citta-mudut: pliancy of mind;
(14) Kya-kammaat: adaptability of mental body
(15) Citta-kammaat: adaptability of mind;
(16) Kya-pguat: proficiency of mental body;
(17) Citta-pguat: proficiency of mind;
(18) Kyujjukat: rectitude of mental body; and

                                        44


(19) Cittujjukat: rectitude of mind. After knowing these beautiful factors that
must accompany moral consciousness, it will not be difficult to ascertain which
state of consciousness is moral or immoral. For easy notice, it can be said that if
any state of consciousness is mindless, it is absolutely immoral; and if any state
of consciousness is heavy, tense, rigid, drowsy, stiff or dominated by a
defilement, or attempts to intervene instead of being impassively mindful of an
object of consciousness, then it is obviously immoral.
                   2.4.2.5 ) The beautiful factors in boundless states
(appamaacetasika)
are the beautiful factors that extend boundless loving-kindness to all animals.
These factors are of 4 types, namely:
(1) Metta: loving-kindness to others;
(2) Karuna: compassion for others to end their suffering;
(3) Mudita: sympathetic joy when others are happy; and
(4) Upekkha: indifference when others suffer and one cannot help. However,
the Higher Doctrine (Abhidhamma) classifies only two kinds of cetasika as
appamannacetasika: karuna and mudita because karuna (lovingkindness)
is adosa (non-hatred) and upekkha (indifference) is tatramajjhattata i.e.
equanimity of mind to conditions, as is described above under the heading of
beautiful factors that are common to all moral consciousness.

                                        45


                    2.4.2.6 ) Nature of Immoral Consciousness
Immoral consciousness is rooted in evils or associated with immoral factors or
akusala cetasika, which are of 14 types/states and are classified into 5 classes;
as follows:
                    2.4.2.7 ) Delusion (moha) class: as follows: -
(1)Moha: delusion or nature that conceals the truth of an object of
consciousness such that the consciousness cannot conceive the object as it
actually is;
(2)Ahirika: shamelessness of bodily, verbal and mental misconduct;
(3)Anottappa: fearlessness of the outcome of evils; and
(4)Uddhacca: restlessness or the natural state in which the mind cannot firmly
concentrate on a mind-object
                    2.4.2.8 ) Greed (lobha) class: These mental factors can
accompany all of the eight types of immoral consciousness rooted in greed:
They are of three types/states, as follows:
(1)Lobha: greed and covetousness of sense-objects  visible objects, sound,
odor, taste, tangible objects and mind objects;
(2)Dihi: misbelief; and
(3) Mna: conceit. Meanwhile, since this is of three types, it is called, the class
of lotika cetasika.

                                        46


                    2.4.2.9 ) Hatred (dosa) class: These mental factors can
accompany two types of consciousness rooted in hatred. They are of four
types/states, as follows:
(1) Dosa: hatred or anger;
(2) Iss: envy of the qualifications or merits of another person or jealousy;
(3) Macchariya: stinginess on one's own property and merits or meanness; and
(4) Kukkucca: remorse or distress arising from a sense of guilt for past wrongs,
worry and anxiety about virtue that has not been done.
Meanwhile, as this class is of four types, it is called, the class of
docatuka cetasika.
                  2.4.2.10 ) Sloth and torpor (thna-middha) class: These
mental factors associate or accompany five types of immoral consciousness that
are prompted (sasankhrikam) (consisting of four types of consciousness rooted
in greed and one type of consciousness rooted in hatred, the details of which
will not be enumerated here because it will make this Article too complex and
difficult
for Dhamma practitioners who have never studied the Higher Doctrine
(Abhidhamma) before). This class is of two types/states of consciousness, as
follows:
(1) Thna: Sloth or nature that depresses or discourages the mind; and
(2)Middha: Torpor or nature that causes drowsiness or idleness

                                         47


to conceive an object of consciousness. Meanwhile, since this class is of 2
types, they are called, thiduka cetasika.
                    2.4.2.11 ) Doubt (vicikicch) class: Indecision and
uncertainty about an object of consciousness is a mental factor that accompanies
only consciousness rooted in doubt. Doubt here only refers to immoral doubt,
i.e. a skeptical doubt about the virtues of the Triple Gem, doubts about the
Aggregates, the Spheres and the
Elements in the past, present and future, and doubts about the Dependent
Origination. Other doubts, such as, doubts about technical matters or a doubt
about a street name, are not regarded as immoral doubts, but are false doubts or
pairpakavicikicch. If consciousness of a Dhamma practitioner is associated
with only one of these mental factors, then it is regarded as immoral. An
immoral mental factor that accompanies every immoral consciousness, which
we should study well, is delusion (moha),which by nature is ignorance of the
truth of an object of consciousness. Particularly for one who practices insight
meditation, if through ignorance consciousness is distracted from Matter and
Mind to a conventional mind-object or although, then it is abstracted. Thus, we
should know abstractedness well because it is a foe that comes to mind most
often for insight practitioners. In any event, it is true that abstraction may lead to
thoughts about a subject matter that is moral, but that would be only a worldly

                                       48


moral or at best meditation practice for concentration, not for insight
development. Insight development requires consciousness to
be mindfulness of Matter and Mind as they truly are. The wording
"mindfulness of Matter and Mind as they truly are" is intrinsically non-
delusion (amoha) or wisdom (pa).
                    2.4.2.12 ) Summary
In sum, Dhamma practitioners should know the states of moral consciousness
and immoral consciousness well. Otherwise, they may ignorantly and
mistakenly develop immoral consciousness in the belief that that they are
practicing Dhamma for insight development.
Following are examples:
(1) If mindful of any object, consciousness becomes heavy, tense, stiff or
drowsy, consciousness at that moment is certainly immoral;
(2) If thinking about an unwholesome matter, the consciousness is obviously
immoral;
(3) If thinking about a wholesome matter, e.g. thinking of helping others,
thinking of repeating "Buddho" as the word of exercise, thinking of noting
movements of the abdomen, thinking of the Triple Gem, contemplating that this
body is impure/loathsome, thinking of in-and-out breathing, reflecting that one
is not a self, only Matter and Mind, which are impermanent, suffering and

                                          49


not-self, then, consciousness at that moment is ordinary moral consciousness.
Thus, it is not yet a practice for insight development; and
(4) If unintentionally consciousness is mindful of the present condition as it
really is, the consciousness will be light, pliant, adaptable, proficient, upright,
mindful, awaken, cheerful, peaceful, clean and bright. The consciousness at that
moment is moral and applicable at the stage of insight development
             2.4.3 )Training in Wisdom
                    2.4.3.1 ) Purpose of Training in Wisdom
To learn how to use quality consciousness to study and comprehend the truths
of Matter and Mind until it can relinquish Matter and Mind and realize Nibbna,
which is a state of oblivion to Matter and Mind, all defilements and craving.
                     2.4.3.2 ) Types of Wisdom
                    2.4.3.3 )    Wisdom classified by quality of knowledge:
divided into 2 types, namely:
(1) Mundane wisdom or lokiya-pa is knowledge and wisdom for living in
this world with minimal suffering or for temporary restraint from suffering or
temporary suppression of defilements and craving. For example, a person with
mundane wisdom will wisely give alms, observe the precepts and practice
meditation for peace of mind, etc.; and

                                        50


(2)   Supermundane      wisdom    or   lokuttara-pa is      knowledge    and
comprehension of the Noble Truths, thereby causing the mind to detach itself
from Matter and Mind/body and mind and realize Nibbna, which is truly
bliss of emancipation.
                   2.4.3.4 ) Wisdom classified by origin: divided into 3 types,
namely:
(1) Sutamayapa or wisdom acquired by acceptance of a transfer of
knowledge from other persons, e.g. wisdom resulting from reading textbooks
and listening to teachings of one's parents and teachers, etc.
(2) Cintamayapa or wisdom acquired by contemplation, reflection or
reasoning; or knowledge that is thought out
(3) Bhavanamayapa or wisdom acquired by development of mindfulness.
This kind of wisdom is further divided into 2 types, namely, wisdom resulting
from Samatha kammahan or meditation, which is knowledge and wisdom of
developing the mind towards tranquility, and Vipassan pann, i.e. penetration
of truths of Matter and Mind through constant mindfulness of Matter and Mind.
       This wisdom will arisen up by observation, we observe the body and
mind spontaneously and not to interrupt in it , we let the nature arise up by
separate the mind to be the observer.

                               51




                                       wisdom resulting from
knowledge that                         mental development or
is thought out                         knowledge from practice




              knowledge that is learn
              from others



               Types of Wisdom

                                         52


       Now we come to the lesson on the arising of insight wisdom which sees
the true nature of the body (rupa) and mind (nama). But first we must see the
mistakes that meditators make which create obstacles to path of insight. We
must not falter to either of the two extremes that block our progress in
Vipassana and in the arising of wisdom. The first extreme is
controlling our mind to the point of suspending it, making it frozen stiff or
overly fine and subtle. The other extreme is letting the mind get lost, mindlessly
following our ignorant and indulgent thoughts. These are the two directions we
can falter  total control, or mindlessly following the lure of the defilements.
Buddhism teaches the middle way. It is important to remember that everything
starts in the mind, and then action follows. So whether we tortuously keep
our bodies under control, or have them mindlessly go unchecked and do
whatever they please, the physical world is not where the root of the mistakes in
our practice lies. We must try to open our minds to what is being said here and
practice it. Then we will see for ourselves whether or not suffering subsides in
our lives. If we want to know the Buddha's middle way in our experience then
we should gradually keep learning until genuine mindfulness arises, the
automatic and impartial awareness of mental and physical phenomena as they
arise in our experience. Genuine mindfulness (sammasati) will occur as a result
of clearly recognizing mental states as they arise, not from holding
concentration in one spot, or mental noting, or forcing it into being.

                                        53


The Abhidhamma teaches that the proximate cause that enables genuine
mindfulness to arise is the recognizing of mental and physical phenomena.
When we first practice using the four foundations of mindfulness
(satipatatahana) that were taught by the Buddha (namely, the body, feelings,
mind and Dhamma), we do so to achieve this mindfulness. We practice
watching the body until we can see the truth of physicality (rupa).
We practice watching feelings until we truly see the reality of feelings (vedana).
We practice watching the mind until we come to know the truth of the mind
(citta). Genuine mindfulness arises on its own when we see the reality of these
things. Usually we should watch the mind.
                    2.4.3.4 ) Those two kinds of people : This is because most
of those who come are city people with busy minds. They are thinkers. Their
jobs involve thinking all day. Watching the mind is the practice most suitable
for such people. Those who are greedy, who want the comforts in life and enjoy
fashion and beauty should practice by watching the body. Take a look at the
decision to go to practice at a meditation center. We don't think about what type
of personality we have. We want to go, so we do. We don't notice our mental
states. Our friends decide to go, so we go too. We unwittingly believe that if a
meditation center becomes popular, it must be a good one. The truth is it may or
may not be. Furthermore, the master may be first-class, but if the practice
doesn't suit our aptitudes and we merely follow the technique as directed, we

                                        54


won't accomplish much. So before we practice we need to observe ourselves
and determine where our abilities lie. If we are the kind that is happy
with worldly pleasures, beautiful things, comfortable surroundings, and like
being left alone in peace and quiet, we may best suited to watch the body. This
is because when we watch the body, we will easily come to know that it is not
happy, comfortable or beautiful. Those who think too much, who are caught up
in their heads, should watch the mind. We should discern which of these two
main personality types matches us best: sensual or analytical; that is, do our
passions lie primarily with worldly pleasures or intellectual ones? Let the choice
here act as a guideline for what our objects of meditation should be when
we begin our practice. If we are primarily sense driven, we should watch the
body, and if we are analytical we should watch the mind. The other two areas to
watch (according to the teachings of the Buddha on the four foundations of
mindfulness, the Satipatathana Sutta) are feelings (Vedana-Nupassana) and the
true nature of phenomena (Dhamma-Nupassana). We should not watch those
two areas until our minds are a little more advanced, a little more ripe for
wisdom. Watch the mind and the body first as they are fundamental. It
is important to note, however, that watching body is most appropriate for those
that are skilled in the absorption concentration levels (jhana). Unskilled minds
that concentrate hard will completely lose themselves in the body. For example,
if we watch the abdomen rising and falling, the mind will be motionless and

                                           55


completely latched to the abdomen, thus rendered ineffective. In walking
meditation, the mind will be latched to the feet lifting and moving. In watching
the breath, the mind will stick to the breath so completely that we lose ourselves
in it. It is difficult to watch the body correctly if the mind is not firmly rooted in
awareness, that is, if our mind tends to slip down into the object of observation.
If we can reach the peace and higher concentration of the second jhana,
something arises that masters in the forest monk tradition call "the knower" or
"the watcher". This watcher is the awakening of right concentration,
an unshakable awareness that clearly sees that the body, the feelings, the good
and bad thoughts, and the mind that watches are all distinct and separate
entities. The body moves; the mind is the watcher. The body sits, and the mind
is the watcher. This point is clearly presented in the Abhidhamma when it
shows the distinction between the knower and the known. This means that when
we watch the body, we should not get immersed in it. The mind should be
independent and watch from a distance as if we are watching someone else. We
see this body stand, walk, sit and lay down. The mind is the watcher. When
we practice in this way, we will see directly that the body is not us. There will
be no need to think about it; the body will be clearly and directly seen as not us
or ours. The body stands, walks, sits and lies down and the mind is the watcher.
This is how to watch the body. One day the truth will show itself that the body

                                         56


is just flesh and bones, water, heat and movement. The body is under constant
oppression by unsatisfactoriness (dukkha), always in some form of discomfort.
Then the mind orders the body to move or act to try to relieve the discomfort.
When we practice correctly we will see the true characteristics of the body for
ourselves. Watching the mind is easier than watching the body.
       When we watch the mind we will see that there are two things that arise
in each moment: a mental phenomenon and consciousness. This is because
one's consciousness does not arise unless there is an object of consciousness
 they appear in unison. We cannot watch the mind without mental phenomena
(cetasika) because the mind has no body or form of its own. So first we should
watch each mental phenomenon, whether it is classified as a feeling or
sensations (vedna), memory (sana), or active thinking or mental formations
(sankhara). All such phenomena arise and fall in conjunction with
consciousness. For example, at times we have a virtuous mind and at times we
do not. Our impression is that the mind that belongs to us is now virtuous,
or it is greedy, averted or lost in thought or sense perceptions. This is how we
perceive it at first. But when the mind that is ripe with wisdom arises, it will
see clearly that consciousness is one thing and greed is another. Consciousness
is one thing and disliking is another. Consciousness is one thing and thought is

                                         57


another. They will show themselves as separate and distinct processes. Later we
will be able to directly watch their true nature (Dhamma-Nupassana). But first,
keep watching and knowing the phenomena that arise in the mind.
If we have already been practicing a certain meditation technique which
involves watching the body and/ or the mind, I recommend we stay with it.
There is no need to stop or change what we do.
      When we understand the principles correctly, we should integrate them
into our present practice. If the fundamental principles behind our practice are
lacking or misconstruced, then it doesn't matter how gracefully we walk or how
still we sit; we will not be practicing Vipassana and what we do will not lead to
insight wisdom. Those in marching bands have beautiful posture and perform
gracefully, but we certainly don't see much enlightenment going on there! Our
posture and technique is not the least bit relevant. We can just keep practicing
whatever style we have learned in the past, though we must bring a correct
understanding into it. If we have practiced watching the in-breath and out-
breath, and we are comfortable with it, then we should keep at it. If we feel
agitated, we may then want to pick another place in the body as a home base for
our attention When we watch the body as in Vipassana meditation. We can
choose any observable phenomenon of the body, we can see that there is rising
and falling occurring there, and the mind merely watches this. The mind must
be the watcher, an independent phenomenon from the object. The mind does not

                                        58


sink down to the abdomen but is rooted in awareness, and simply sees that the
body has this rising and falling motion at the abdomen. Or the mind sees the
body is breathing in. It sees the body breathing out. The mind watches the body
stand, walk, sit and lay down . The mind is just the watcher. The body moves
and the mind watches. The body ceases to be ours. This body moves, but it is
not us moving. True mindfulness arises. The mind awakens and sees that the
physical form that is moving is not us.




                                                          "Buddha gave permission
                                                          to Saributra to ordain
                                                          Rahula to be a novice."

                                         59




       2.5 ) Maha Satipahna Sutta
       " Thus have I heard, on one occasion the Blessed One was staying in the
Kuru country. Now there is a town of Kurus called Kammasadhamma. There
the Blessed One addressed the monks ' Monks.'
       'Lord,' the monks replied.
       The Blessed One said this:' This is the direct path for the purification of
beings, for the overcoming of sorrow and lamentation, for the disappearance of
pain and distress, for the attainment of the right method, and for the realization
of unbinding- in other words , the four frames of reference . Which four?'
       There is a case where a monk remains focused on the body in and of
itself- ardent, alert, and mindful-putting aside greed and distress with reference
to the world . He remains focused on feelings....mind....mental qualities in and
of themselves- ardent, alert, and mindful- putting aside greed and distress with
reference to the world."
             2.5.1) Mindfulness of the body ( Kynupassan)
" And how does monks a remain focused on the body in and of itself?"
                     2.5.1.1 Mindfulness of breathing
       " There is the case where the monk-having gone to the wilderness , to the
shade of the tree, or to an empty building- sits down folding his legs crosswise,

                                          60


holing his body erect and setting mindfulness to the fore [lit: the front of the
chest]
      Breathing in long, he discerns that he breathing in long; or breathing out
long, he discern that he is breathing out long.
      Or breathing in short, he discerns that he is breathing in short; or
breathing out short, he discern that he is breathing out short.
      He trains himself to breathe in sensitive to the entire body and to breathe
out sensitive to the entire body . He trains himself to breathe in calming the
bodily fabrication and to breath out in calming the bodily fabrication. Just as a
skilled turner or his apprentice , when making a long turn, discerns that he is
making a long turn, or when making a short turn, discerns that he is making a
short turn, in the same way the monk, when breathing in long, discerns that he
breathing in long; or breathing in short , he discerns that , he breathing in
short.... He trains himself to breathe in calming the bodily fabrication and to
breath out in calming the bodily fabrication.
      In this way he remains focused internally on the body and of itself, or
externally on the body in and of itself, or both internally and externally on the
body in and of itself. Or he remains focused on the phenomenon of origination
with regard to the body, on the phenomenon of passing away with regard to the
body ,or on the phenomenon of origination and passing away with regard to the
body. Or his mindfulness that ' There is the body' is maintain to nthe extent of

                                        61


knowledge and remembrance . And he remains independent, unsustained by (
not clinging to ) anything in the world. This is how the monk remains focused
on the body in and of itself."
                    2.5.1.2 ) The Four Postures
        " Furthermore , when walking, the monk discerns that he is walking.
When standing, he discerns that he is standing. When sitting, he discerns that he
is sitting. When lying down , he discerns that he is lying down. Or however his
body is disposed, that is how he discerns it.
        In this way he remains focused internally on the body in and on itself, or
focused externally....unsustained by anything in the world. This is how a monk
remains focused on the body in and on itself.
                    2.5.1.3 ) Clear Awareness in Minor Postures
        " Furthermore , when going forward and returning , he makes himself
fully alert; when looking toward and looking away..when bending and
extending his limbs....when carrying his outer cloak, his upper robe and his
bowl....when eating, drinking, chewing, and savoring...when urinating and
defecating...when walking, standing, sitting, falling asleep, walking up, talking,
and remaining silent, he makes himself fully alert.
        In this way he remains focused internally on the body in and on itself, or
focused externally....unsustained by anything in the world. This is how a monk
remains focused on the body in and on itself.

                                          62




             2.5.2 Mindfulness of feelings ( Vedannupassan )
" And how does monks a remain focused on the body in and of itself?"
      There is the case where a monk , when feeling a painful feeling, discerns
that he is feeling a painful feeling. When feeling a pleasant feeling, he is feeling
a pleasant feeling, he discerns that he is feeling a pleasant. When feeling a
neither - painful-nor - pleasant feeling., he discerns that he is feeling a neither-
painful-nor-pleasant feeling.
      When feeling a painful feeling of the flesh, he discerns that he is feeling a
painful feeling of the flesh. When feeling a painful feeling not to the flesh, he
discerns that he is feeling a painful feeling not to the flesh . When feeling a
neither - painful-nor - pleasant feeling of the flesh, he discerns that he is feeling
a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling of the flesh.
      In this way he remains focused internally on feelings in and of
themselves, or externally on feelings in and of themselves, or both internally
and externally on feelings in and of themselves Or he remains focused on the
phenomenon of origination with regard to feelings, on the phenomenon of
passing away with regard to the body ,or on the phenomenon of origination and
passing away with regard feelings. Or his mindfulness that ' There are feelings'
is maintain to the extent of knowledge and remembrance . And he remains

                                         63


independent, unsustained by ( not clinging to ) anything in the world. This is
how the monk remains focused on feelings in and of themselves."
            2.5.3 ) Mindfulness of the Mind ( Cittnupassan )
       " And how does monks a remain focused on the mind in and of itself?"
There is the case where a monk, when the minds has passion. discerns that the
mind has passion. When the minds is without passion. discerns that the mind is
without passion. When the mind has aversion, he discerns that the mind has
aversion. When the mind is without aversion, he discerns that the mind is
without aversion. . When the mind has delusion , he discerns that the mind has
delusion. . When the mind is without delusion , he discerns that the mind is
without delusion.
      When the mind is restricted, he discerns that the mind is restricted. When
the mind is scattered, he discerns that the mind is scattered. When the mind is
enlarged , he discerns that the mind is enlarged. When the mind is not enlarged ,
he discerns that the mind is not enlarged. When the mind is surpassed , he
discerns that the mind is surpassed. When the mind is unsurpassed , he discerns
that the mind is unsurpassed. When the mind is concentrated , he discerns that
the mind is concentrated. When the mind is not concentrated , he discerns that
the mind is not concentrated. . When the mind is released , he discerns that the
mind is released. . When the mind is not released , he discerns that the mind is
not released.

                                         64


       In this way he remains focused internally on the mind in and of itself, or
externally on the mind in and of itself, or both internally and externally on the
mind in and of itself. Or he remains focused on the phenomenon of origination
with regard to the mind, on the phenomenon of passing away with regard to the
mind ,or on the phenomenon of origination and passing away with regard on the
mind. Or his mindfulness that ' There is a mind' is maintain to the extent of
knowledge and remembrance . And he remains independent, unsustained by (
not clinging to ) anything in the world. This is how the monk remains focused
on the mind in and on itself"
             2.5.4 ) Mindfulness of the Mental-Quality( Dhammnupassan)
       " And how does monks a remain focused on the mind in and of itself?"
                    2.5.4.1 ) The five Hindrances
       " There is the case where a monk remains focused on the mental qualities
in and on themselves with reference to the five hindrances. And how does a
monk remain focused on the mental qualities in and on themselves with
reference to the five hindrances? There is a case where, there being sensual
desire present within me , a monk discerns that ' There is sensual desire present
within me' or there is no sensual desire present within me , a monk discerns
that ' There is no sensual desire present within me' He discerns how there is the
arising of unarisen sensual desire. And he discerns how there is the abandoning
of sensual desire once it has arisen. And he discerns how there is no future

                                        65


arising of sensual desire that has been abandoned. [ The same formula is
repeated for the remaining hindrances: ill will, sloth and torpor, restlessness and
anxiety, and doubt]
      In this way he remains focused internally on mental qualities in and of
themselves, or externally on mental qualities in and of themselves, or both
internally and externally on mental qualities in and of themselves Or he
remains focused on the phenomenon of origination with regard to mental
qualities, on the phenomenon of passing away with regard to mental qualities
,or on the phenomenon of origination and passing away with regard to mental
qualities. Or his mindfulness that ' There are mental qualities' is maintain to the
                                                 extent of knowledge and
                                                 remembrance . And he remains
                                                 independent, unsustained by
                                                 ( not clinging to ) anything in the
                                                 world. This is how the monk
                                                 remains focused on mental
                                                 qualities in and of themselves
                                                 with reference to the five
                                                 hindrances"
                                                 ( The Buddha came back to
                                                 Kabillabhat Town .

                                     66


     PART THREE : ) practice meditation


       PRACTICE MEDITATION



           Saupadisesa Nibbana
           Nibbana with the substratum of
           life remaining


                Anupadisesa Nibbana : Nibbana
                without the substratum of lifre
                remaining



The purpose of to practice meditation is to achieve the NIBBANA.
Nibbana is the state whereby all the burning desires, piecing pains,
passions and sufferings closely associated with the human mind are being
extinguished. The manner by which the "burning heat " of the mind is
being extinguished refers to the manner by which     the mind reaches the
extinguishing point which is called " Nibbana"
Thus " Nibbana' in the human and spiritual context implies a condition
in which our mind is absolutely not being burnt and pierced by all sorts

                                        67


of desires and other associating feeling of binding attachment and
cravings
      3.1) Tools for Practicing Dhamma
An important tools for observing mind is mindfulness and clear
comprehension (sati and sampajanna) As a matter of fact, the word
"mindfulness" in the Tipitaka means recollection. The Abhidhamma further
explains that mindfulness is characterized by the presence of mind. It also
indicates that the proximate cause of mindfulness is a strong perception of
the condition. which mean awareness, attentiveness, and constant
observation. The vipassana meditation is to be aware of the feelings that are
happening in our mind. Some examples are feelings of doubt, greed, worry,
happiness and sadness. This is the practice of being mindful, which is the tool to
be aware of the objects of consciousness that arise. We are all encouraged to be
aware and not to get lost through the six sense doors, namely, the eyes, ears,
nose, tongue, body (tactile sense) and mind, of which most common are through
the eye and the mind doors, intently focusing on an object or getting lost in the
world of thoughts. By consistently being aware, not getting lost in thoughts or
over-focusing, we can achieve clear comprehension, clarity of consciousness.
      Through continuous practice , your mindfulness and clear
comprehension will gain strength and your awareness becomes more
refined . Each time the mind tell you to do something , you do not take

                                     68


action  immediately but mindfulness and clear comprehension will assit
in determining whether your mind 's command should be followed:
the four type of clear comprehension are :
                 3.1.1) Clear comprehension of purpose ( Satthaka -
sampajanna) informs you whether an action is useful or not . The
main you types of usefulness are :usefulness for the body and for the
development os wholesome states . For example , when someone is
walking nex t to you as you are practicing walking meditation ,you are
incline to turn into that direction to find out who that person is .But
you clear comprehension will ponder whether that action is . useful or
not . If it is determined to be useful , You can take a look at the
person . if not , then you should not pay attention . Observe yourself
during mindfulness practice if you have ever felt this way.
                  3.1.2 . Clear comprehension of suitability
( Sappaya - sampajanna) decides whether an action commanded by the
mind will lead to danger or not.
                  3.1.3. Clear comprehension of the domain ( Gocara -
sampajanna ) contemplates all movements of the body, from the
beginning to the end . For instance , you are aware of your hand
reaching out, being   lowered , touching   something , or yourself drinking

                                    69


something , putting something down. You are completely aware of all
physical activities.
                  3.1.4. Clear comprehension of reality (Asmmoha-
sampajnna ) contemplates the action between the mind and the body
.As the mind commands it, the body's action follow in order to satisfy
the mind . For instance , you become instantly aware that you are
standing up as a result of the mind's command. This kind of awareness
is called awareness through existence, sense-doors and the Four
Primary Elements : element of extension ( solid element ) , element of
cohesion ( fluid element) element of heat or radiation
( heating element) element of vibration or motion ( air element )

           3.2 Samatha and Vipassana Meditation
                  3.2.1 The differentiation between Samatha and
Vipassana
  Headings              Samatha                          Vipassana
   The Purpose Tranquillity                          Enlightenment
Level of                 Secondary                       Primary
Important
Characteristic        1.lustful 2.Dosa               1.Conventional

                                     70


of a person           3.Deluded4.Faitful                2.Thinkable
                      5.Intelligent6.speculative
The Objects           Any objects                       Foundation of
                                                        Mindfulness 4
Practicing            Object examination                Characteristic
                                                        of examination
Practicing            Need quiet places                 Daily life
                                                        practicing
The result            Happiness                         Nibbana
      The practice of insight meditation or vipassana bhavana ,inwhich
mindfulness in Satipathana 4, is the most important element. The kind of
insight practice is based on the state of the mind in between momentary
concentration( khanika samathi) and neighborhood samadhi.

      The second is Samatha meditation, in which highly concentration of
jhana has been already attained in this stage, the mind is completely
controlled by the force of will power into the tranquil state of absorption
, which actively prepare for application all duties including realization of
the true nature through Satipatathan 4 and three kinds of wisdom.

                                      71


        To practiced Samatha meditation , a properly structured
environment is required. For example, it should be relatively seclude and
quiet place , somewhat segregated from other activities and completely
free from disturbances.
       Contrarily, vipassana meditation does not need any of these
requirements. Although Samatha, in the initial states of practice, may
prove valuable, but this training employs only one object as a tool for
cultivating one - pointedness of mind, whereas meditation in the form of
vipassana meditation , use all available experiences as the primary matrix
by which mindfulness and insight may be developed.
       In this way , this kind of insight meditation can take place in all
experiences, physical, emotional, and psycological, as its objects of
training. It also means that one can practice it in all activities and
situation that Samatha can not enjoy this kind of free range. So we may
asset that Vipassana meditation in this kind of vipassana samadhi is one
spiritual discipline that can be practiced in all times, in all places and all
under circumstances.
       Samatha and Vipassana meditation are also different in terms of the
objectives and goals each aims to achieve . The former is connected with
one pointed-ness of mind, tranquility , psychic powers , whereas the latters

                                       72


aims as increased awareness, knowledge, wisdom, right understanding ,
virtues and purification of the mind and the realization of Nibana.
      To practise this kind of meditation, Satipathana , the foundation of
mindfullness is the key factor in the development of Vipassana . This
mindfullness is the quality of awareness, which is applied to four groups
of experiences , namely the body, the sensation , the mind and the mental
objects ( particularly in reference to moral and spiritual experience of
dhamma) . Thus the discourse is divided into four principal sections each
dealing with and individual class of experiences on which mindfulness
should be cultivated.
      Beginners may find it more practicable to begin training with
mindfulness with the first section of Satipathana on the body , particular
the breathing exercises. Once the basic technique has been mastered, it
becomes increasingly more natural to " ever dwell in meditation" constantly
and effortlessly observing other parts of the body, the feeling , the mind
and the mental objects , even while carrying one's own duties and
responsibilities in the daily life.
      a ) Kynupassan : Contemplation to the body
      The first section of mindfulness deals with the body
( kayanupassana) This includes the breath , the physical postures, the
body activities, the analysis of various physical components, the material

                                              73


elements, and death. These are realities of life one has to deal with. One
should practice constantly applying mindfulness to all these experiences
founded on the body, for instance, mindful of the breath, whether short
or long , shallow or deep, refined or crude, regular or irregular, and so
forth. The purpose is to train the mind is on the present, by being
constantly aware of what is going on at the moment. The same principle
may be applied to the body posture, as standing, walking , sitting or lying
down as well as to other physical activities like eating or drinking.
           3.3 ) Foundation of Mindfulness
           Kayanupassana(Contemplate to
           the body)
           Body, the physical postures, the body
            activities,
           Breath


           Vedananupassana
            ( Contemplate to the feeling)
            pleasant, unpleasant and
           neutral

                                         74


       b) Vedannupassan : contemplation to the feeling
       The second section deals with feeling ( vedannupassan) of three
types , pleasant, unpleasant and neutral. These feelings keep arising one
after another that mindfulness and circumspection should be applied to
them at the moment they arise, understanding them objectively as
conditioned phenomena that rise and fall according to the law of
causality, not subjectively as " my feeling". According to the Buddha, the
false belief in the existence of soul or self is largely due to our feelings.
It is there for important that one should train oneself to perceive reality as
it is, by simply observing one's own feelings for what they really are,
natural phenomena that constantly arise and disappear in accordance with
their conditionality. The other ways to consider feelings is the careful
analysis of their nature, their origination and dissolution. In order to
achieve this objective by the use of Vedana nupassana , one is fully
mindful whether one experiences pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral feeling,
and to be aware     of the feeling without attachment to them.
       c) Cittnupassan: contemplation to the mind
       The third section( Cittanupassana) deals with the mind . It is the
spiritual practice involves the ability to understand and control one's own
mind and thoughts, in various conditions such as sensual desire, hatred,
vacillation, concentration, liberation etc, ever mindful of their origination

                                      75


and dissolution. Besides observing how they change and are conditioned,
the meditators should constantly apply full awareness of the present
moment of experience only, not the past of the future and simply
acknowledging the existence and nature of those mental phenomena .There
is no conscious intervention involved to suppress one thought or
encourage another. It is a simple, uncomplicated process of recognizing
the realities as they are, a pure psycological act of detached
understanding and acceptance.
      By continually practicing according to this method, one not only
comes to understand oneself better, but will eventually be able to
penetrate deeply into the most remote reaches of one 's own
consciousness . This kind of practice is not only valuable as far as
Vipassana is concerned, but substantially contributes to peace and
harmony , both within the individual and society.
       d) Dhammnupassan , discuss the dhamma as a system of
ethical and spiritual experiences . I n the practical term, This may also
include mindfulness in contemplation, deliberation, and investigation of
the Buddha's teachings in the context of one's own perception at the
present moment. Because these Dhamma experience are subjected to the
contemplation and investigation of mind, they are refered to as mental
objects. A few categories of Dhamma are listed in Satipathana Sutta such

                                         76


as ; the five hindrances, the five aggregates, The six Senses Bases, the
seven Factors of enlightenment, the Four Noble Truths.
       3.4) The purpose of Samatha and Vipassana
       As mention earlier, there are two main types of meditation found in
Buddhism: Samatha and Vipassana. In coming to the practice of Samatha or
Vipassana, we need to have the mental clarity to know which one we have
selected and for what purpose. The purpose of Samatha is to bring a mind that
is not peaceful to a state of peace, to bring a mind that is not happy to a state of
happiness, and to bring an unwholesome mind to a state of virtue. In
Vipassana, we do not practice to change anything in this way, but to gain a
proper understanding of the way things are (samm-dhitti). We practice so we
can see the true nature of body and mind. The body and mind were seen by the
Buddha as five distinct groups or aggregates called the five khandhas. Each of
which has the inherent characteristic that is called non-substantiality and
unsatisfactoriness (dukkha). We must come to know the truth of this in our
experience. So our job is to become aware of the body and mind regularly with
an inner watchfulness.
       This is the practice of Vipassana. When we practice in this way with
frequency, wisdom arises  we come to know the true nature of the body and
mind. This kind of wisdom is called right understanding (sammdhitti). We
come to know that the body and mind are impermanent, suffering and are not

                                          77


our self, not us. When we have enough wisdom to see the truth of this clearly,
authentically, consciousness can then let go of any attachment to the body and
mind, and automatically comes to know nirvana (Nibbna), the end of
suffering.
If we practice watching the body and mind a great deal, one day we will truly
see that the body and mind are just aggregates, elements of nature, fractions of
the earth. They are not us, nor do they belong to us. When we see the truth that
there is nothing we can constitute as being ourselves, we will reach the first
stage of enlightenment called stream-entry (sotpanna). If we continue watching
the body and mind carefully to the point of letting go of all attachment to them,
then we become an arahant - one who has completely ended suffering. An
arahant is not someone who is able to make the mind something permanently
good, or create permanent happiness or permanent peace. He or
she is one who no longer takes interest in such things. Peace, happiness and the
like are worldly endeavors. An arahant knows the futility in trying to pursue
satisfaction through worldly measures. He or she knows the true nature of body
and mind and is beyond any attachment to them. We need to practice Vipassana
to learn the truth about the body and mind that we consider our own. True
liberation, the end of suffering, is not in trying to make the mind permanently
happy or peaceful, but in seeing the nature of the body and mind as

                                          78


impermanent, suffering and not us  and then letting go. Wisdom arises when
there is concentration or samadhi. Formally put, samadhi is the proximate
cause for wisdom. However, samadhi is of two kinds and only the second one is
conducive to wisdom.
       3.5 ) Two kinds of Samadhi
       The first kind of samadhi is calld object-examination (aramma-
n'upanijjhana).and another one is characteristic -examination
(lakkha-n'upanijjhana).
a) Aramma-n'upanijjhana : or (object-examination): when there is just one
object of attention and the mind sticks to this object and is rendered still. The
mind is very focused and peaceful in this state. An example is meditation on
breathing. The mind moves down into the breath and clings to it. Another
choice for this type of meditation is the rising and falling of the abdomen. The
meditator will let his mind sink down into the movement of the abdomen and
rest there peacefully. In walking meditation, those who hold their focus on the
feet are also exhibiting this first type of samadhi . This first type of samadhi,
object-examination, is accomplished during calmness meditation, otherwise
known as Samatha meditation. Even using the mind itself as the object of
meditation can bring us into this type of samadhi. Watching the mind isn't
always Vipassana. If we watch the mind incorrectly, and hold it still, we are
just doing Samatha. It is the same as intently keeping our mindfulness on the

                                           79


breath. The mind is of the nature to know an object. The object is that which is
of the nature to be known. So if we watch the breath, the breath is the object;
the breath is what is known. If we watch the body standing, walking, sitting and
lying down, the body is the object; the body is what is known. Greed, anger and
delusion are things that are known. The mind is what knows these things. The
mind itself can be both known and that which knows, but it is not both at
the same time. Everything happens in succession. The process can only be
described as a succession of minds or mental moments. At one mental moment
the mind is angry. In the next moment, the mind knows this. The mind that is
angry is gone and replaced by the mind that knows. The mind is the one that
knows all of the khandhas or aggregates When the mind itself is known, it is
functioning as the object. No matter what the object of meditation may be, if we
are focusing in on it, we are practicing Samatha and will achieve aramma-
n'upanijjhana, the first kind of samadhi. If we are looking to practice Vipassana
meditation, then we need to learn about the second kind of samadhi. It is called
characteristic-examination(lakkha-n'upanijjhana).
        Samadhi is stability of mind, not just concentration. When the stable
observer is achieved, it witnesses the antics of the body and mind at a distance.
It is a feeling of separartion, not an action separation or " out of the body"
experience. The mind , or the consciousness does not leave the body, but is seen
as something completely distinc from the body.

                   80




STEP 1 Practice SAMATHA

Practice the 1st kind of SAMADHI , Object -
examinationBreathing -in ( BUD) , Breathing -out
( DHO ) the mind and the object harmony into
one




                 BUD



                   DHO

                                   81




STEP 2 Practice Citta Vipassana ( the 2nd kind of SAMADHI)

The mind aware of its self and the Buddho. The Mind is stable
and seeing the phenomena pass by .If we practice the 2nd kind
of samadhi , we will achieve correct concentration; stable , light
and nimble, we clearly see the phenomena of body and mind
arise and fall.




                      BUD


                      DHO



                                       MIND


    THOUGHT



                                                      ANGER

                                         82


The first type of Samadhi Know only Bud-dho. But the second type of Samadhi
know both the mind and the Bud-dho.

       b ) (lakkha-n'upanijjhana).or (characteristic -examination )
       This samadhi is one that is stable in the sense that it remains separate
from phenomena. It allows us to see the true characteristics of body and mind,
of mental and physical phenomena (rupa-nama). We may see the body is not us
but is just matter, or the working of elements, or just processes of sensory input
and interpretation. In the second type of samadhi, the mind is the stable and
unattached watcher or knower. The kind of samadhi where the knower arises is
essential for seeing the truth, seeing the three Characteristics. The knower is the
colloquial term for concentration of the characteristic examination variety. It is
the place from where we can practice Vipassana. In a few moments, I will
describe how we can practice so that the knower can arise.
       The reason why the mind runs around looking for this and that is because
it is incessantly looking for happiness. Our decision to listen to or to read this
Dhamma talk is because we are looking for happiness. After we finish listening
or reading, we may look for something tasty to eat to once again in pursuit of
happiness. Then after we eat and feel full, we think we will be happier if we
take a rest. The mind and body are running around looking for objects to bring
happiness constantly. However, if the mind is happy with the object it is
involved with already, then it will not go off looking for something else. This is

                                        83


the secret to proper Samatha meditation. This is how we can stop the busy mind
and have a restful time of peace. Samatha has an important purpose. We need
it to rest the mind so it can have power and fortitude. If we don't practice
Samatha and achieve the first kind of samadhi, our Vipassana practice
will be greatly hindered. We won't have the fortitude and momentum to keep up
the practice. Those of us that watch the mind well will see that the mind cannot
walk the path of wisdom all the time. It will need to rest. The mind will move
into Samatha automatically at times, staying still in one place. In fact, it does
this even more often than Vipassana. Wisdom comes up just for a short while at
a time, and then the mind becomes still again. A word of warning to those that
prefer to watch the mind: make sure you keep up Samatha practice as well. It is
essential in order to keep the mind fresh and powerful enough to walk the path
of wisdom well. Those without the first kind of samadhi will have trouble doing
Vipassana for longer periods. Wisdom may arise briefly and then the mind will
go off on a thinking tangent. Those that are too attached to Samatha should be
careful too. The mind may be resting well for a while but then go off into dazes
or dream states.
       For both kinds of samadhi, the principles are quite easy. In the first kind,
choose an object in the body or mind that we are happy with. When the mind is
happy, it will stay concentrated and have no need to look for happiness

                                     84


elsewhere. In the second kind, we watch a meditation object and notice
whenever the mind goes away from or towards it instead of just knowing it.
      3.6 ) Practicing Mindfulness in Daily life
Once we understand the proper principles of Dhamma, it is time to put
the teachings to practice in our daily lives . Let's get rid of the image
that many of us have in our heads, that a good Vipassana or Dhamma
practitioner sits cross- legged with the eyes and closed. The most
important part of the practice is mindfulness through our regular
activities in daily life. Whenever an impurity arises in the mind , we
know that it has right then and there, irrespective of what else we may
be doing at the time. That is called Dhamma practice. When the body
makes movement and we know it , that is Dhamma practice. When the
mind forms a thought or an emotion and we know it has just doneso ,
we practice the Dhama for that moment
      a) Awareness when we get up in the morning , we practice to
awareness that we lying down on the bed , and next may awareness the
breath, breathing " Bhud" , Breathing out " Dho". Apart from this we
may also required to become realize that the body that is lying down is
known by the mind , The mind is a " knower"
.

                                    85




                                        Practice mindfulness
                                        in sweeping the
                                        leaves .




     b) Awareness of the bathroom activities.
While taking a shower, brushing our teeth , or performing other activities
in the bath room , we should awareness the body is standing or sitting
postures while we in the bathroom , and mind is a knower who know this
postures .The body is only the mass of something that is observed by
the mind.
     c) Now when we are at work, we should be focused on our duties
at hand. However . if we have a few minutes here and there with
nothing to do, we can immediately start to watch the body and mind. we

                                    86


can know the stress has arisen . That is Dhama practice right then and
there. Perhaps we are hurry to complete a project and then someone
calls and is wasting our time .Our mind feel angry. We then can practice

                                             Practice mindfulness
                                             in sweeping the
                                             leaves .




mindfulness and know that anger has arisen. Then we keep working away
until we look at the clock and it is lunch time. Satisfaction arises and we
become aware and see that it has. This is what a true Dhamma
practitioner does.

                                    87


      d) Next we go down for lunch and walk along and watch the body
walking . The mind is the observer and the body is being observed.
What to eat? There are so many choices today. We must be very hungry
as everything looks wonderful . The mind is indecisive. We know that it
is. On some days nothing at all looks appetizing and the mind feels
annoy, " This cafeteria sucks. Can't they be more original ? If we don't
have mindfulness the hungrier we are , the more we complain.
      Sometimes we have to use the washroom really badly! We run to
the washroom and see that all the stall are full. We really start to worry
.Now it is an emergency and our belly is in serious pain. We then run
to the wash room on another floor and see it is full too, and people are
waiting in the line . The mind is in panic. We come to know that this is
so. If we can have the mindfulness that see the anxiety, Then our stomach
may be in pain, but our mind will not be. This is Dhamma practice.

                 88




Practice mindfulness in working together

                                       89


We watch our mind and see what happens moment to moment soon, we
will see that our mind is always in flux: One moment it is happy and the
next it is unhappy and then next it is neutral. One moment the mind is
wholesome and joyfully practicing the Dhama, and the next moment it is
struggling, lost in the painful story. Can we see this ?The mind in a flash
changes from greedy to angry and then off in thought.
      We are not practicing to be super human. We are just to be
ordinary people like we are now. We keep practicing in daily life to see
what an ordinary human body and mind are like , what their true
characteristic are. When we understand their true characteristics, we won't
be upset when this or that happens to the body and mind . Getting old is
normal, getting sick is normal, and dying is normal. Not getting what we
want s normal. Getting we don't want is normal. Dream coming true ,
dream shattered are all normal. They cannot bring us comfort or
happiness w can truly rely on. Accept this , whatever happens in our life
will appear as if is happening to someone else and not us. If there is no
us , the who is it that acts ?It is the body and mind , The aggregates that
act all on their own. And it is the aggregates that receive the results of
action too. There is no person to experience the results of our actions;
there are only the aggregates of body and mind that do. We break free
to the cycle of karma, one could say. There is tremendous relief and

                                      90


incomparable happiness when we are no longer living in the delusion that
there is a self, with full wisdom, It is the aggregates and not us that
move about the functionally , dong this and that. And if there is just an
aggregates and the idea of a " me" is just a delusion, then who suffer.
The body and mind may suffer, But we certainly don't. We become free
from suffering because we have a correct understanding of the way
things are. We have enlightened wisdom. The cycle of birth and death is
a very long painful one. It is a very rare occurrence that a being will
have the chance to listen to and become interested in the Dhamma that
liberates us from this cycle of suffering once and for all. Let's not spend
our time mindlessly and without meaning. Let's gradually bring awareness
to our body and our mind, and practice The bhuddhist way to peace of
mind.
      3.7 ) Feel your entire body : Two highly Effective Techniques
      While you continue to observe your breathing so that your mind
is used to practice and can firmly concentrate on your breathing . You
should add another mindfulness develop wisdom . Observing your breath
is a closed and fixed mode of concentration which prevent the mind
from acknowledging other sensations. Therefore , mindfulness and clear
comprehension cannot be fully developed.

                                     91


      It is recommended that you shift your focus after mastering your
breath, to feeling your entire body holistically instead. What you gain
from this practice is also mindfulness , but it is a mindfulness that is
free to observe other occurrences or emotions.
            3.7.1 ) How to feel your entire body
      There are two ways to practice this method:
      1.Feel your entire body through intense observation
            a. Observe your body from top to bottom, from the head to
the toes.
            b. Observe each body part : in detail, the front and the back
,the top, the bottom and the sides. For instance , if you are observing
your arm, observe it from the top to the bottom , the front, the back ,
and the sides.
            c. Then move on to another body part and do the same.
            d. Once you finish observing all body parts, start from the
bottom instead.
            e. Repeat these observation again and again until you can
master this practice.
      Mastery of this skill is highly beneficial to you since being able to
move your awareness to different parts of the body strengthens     your
mindfulness and clear comprehension so that they can see right through

                                     92


your body like the x-ray, whether from the front to the back, the top to
the bottom or vice versa. You can use this technique to extinguish your
suffering during an illness.
      The mind, which is not limited to one place but can travel to all
area of the body, can develop mindfulness and clear comprehension
quickly and effectively . This is a popular method among meditation
masters sine it can help the mind maintain concentration all day, and the
mindfulness and clear comprehension becomes highly advanced.
                  3.7.2. Feel your body through holistic observation
            a. Use mindfulness to observe your body without focusing on
any particular state.
            b. Observe the state in which the body parts are: its position
( head , neck, back , and arms) movements , and sensations.
            c. See if you experience any new sensations. Stay with that
sensation. Your legs might feel cold, so just observe it. Your back feel
hot; Just observe it. When you feel a new sensation,   anywhere in your
body , move your awareness there and your mindfulness and clear
comprehension will become highly developed.
      This technique allow you to use everything that happen to your
body and your mind as a tools for developing mindfulness and clear

                                        93


comprehension , whether it's your breathing, bodily functions, feelings,
thought, etc.
      Whatever appears at any given time, observe your mind and learn
from it. This method is a way to practice mindfulness. When you are able
to do this , concentration and wisdom can be achieved, and you become
aware of your internal sense-fields: eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body and
mind.
      Holistic awareness of one's body using these two methods only
leads to benefits. There is no negative impact from this practice. Once this
practice is mastered, you will no longer need to focus on your breathing.
      Breathing observation and holistic awareness of one's body are ideal
when you are sitting, standing and lying down. When you walk, you can
practice mindfulness and clear comprehension in specific area.
      3.8) Walking Meditation: the best mindfulness practice
             Contemplation of the steps in walking meditation: If in
walking meditation, one is absorbed and mindless, then it is unacceptable. If
one gazes so intently that consciousness is firmly fixed to the feet or the
walking body, then it is concentration (Samatha) practice. If mindfulness is
aware of the walking body and consciousness is a knower that is separate
from the body, that is insight (Vipassan) practice on the foundation of body.
If during the walking meditation consciousness is abstracted and mindfulness

                                           94


recollects it, if it gazes at the walking steps and mindfulness recollects it, if it
is happy, unhappy or indifferent and mindfulness recollects it, and if
consciousness is moral or immoral, mindfulness recollects it, then these are
exercises in mindfulness of the condition of Mind. They are stepping stones to
mindfulness practice towards insight development on the foundation of Mind.
Compared to standing , walking , sitting and lying down. walking is the
beat practice for developing mindfulness and clear comprehension . As
there is much more phenomena to observe. Taking only one step at a
time, one can develop mindfulness and clear comprehension through
dedicated and continuous observation.
      Walking meditation practice
Step 1
          To practice mindfulness effectively through walking , one
              must be focused and walking in appropriate manner. First,
              you must stand tall with your hands held together in front .
              You can also hang your arms on the side or cross your arm
              on the chest. Try different position that you feel comfortable.
          Maintain your posture by looking straight ahead
              , not too high, not too low . Remain indifferent towards your
              surrounding, but you do not close your eyes.

                                   95


    Place your feet about three inches wide apart. Check to see if
      the weight on both feet is equal. Observe carefully with your
      mind and adjust       so that your feet are balanced.
    Pay attention to the right foot. Lift up your right foot slowly ,
      move forward, when your sole touch the ground , you say to
      yourself " Bud", then observe your weight transfer on the
      right sole when you move your body to the right foot.
    Next, pay attention to the left foot. Lift up your left foot slowly
      , move forward, when your sole touch the ground , you say
      to yourself " dho", then observe your weight transfer on the
      left sole when you move your body to the            foot.
Be aware both your right and left are moving while you focusing
on moving your feet, try to observe your mind too.
STEP 2:
      We practice walking meditation like the first step. But when we lift
up the right sole we say " Bud" when we put it down , we say " Dho".We
do it again in the left foot , when lft it up we say " Bud" , when we put it
down we say " Dho" .We will concentrate both when we are lifting the
sole and put it down ,quicker than the first step, so the mind has a job to
do more than the first step , it won't have time to think.

                                  96




      We always practice walking meditation first before parctice
sitting meditation. Because practice walking will develop
mindfulness more than concentration. Sitting will develop
concentration more than mindfulness. So we need it both, cause it
support each other. A lot of benefits when we practice walking
meditation , it help us to have a good health.

                            97

      STEP 1) Walking meditation




        3)BUD                    1) BUD
4)DHO




             2)DHO

                      98


  STEP 2) Walking meditation




          3
                                   1
DHO
                            DHO
           DHO      BUD
4   BUD
                         2       BUD    BUD

99

                                        100


      3.9 ) How to awareness of the mind

The phrase `awareness of the mind' is reference to contemplation of feelings or
Vedana-nupassana-Satipatthanna, contemplation of mind or Citta-nupassana-
sati-patathanna, and contemplation of mind-objects or Dhamma-Nupassana-
sati-patathanna (those types which are related to mental phenomena). In short, it
means to practice insight meditation by being aware of mind and mental
phenomena.
             3.9.1 ) Method for practicing insight meditation
(awareness of mind)
Practicing all types of insight meditation, including awareness of mind, is not
difficult. All we need to do is to be aware of phenomena of the mind that arise,
as they truly are, with a stable and equanimous mind. But to be aware correctly,
one must (1) have the right quality of mind and (2) have the right object of
consciousness. The qualities of mind necessary for practicing the foundations of
mindfulness, or insight meditation, are the minds with right mindfulness
(samma-sati), clear comprehension or right understanding (samma-ditt hi), and
right concentration (samma-samadhi). The right object of consciousness is one
that appears at the present, and can show the three characteristics of existence,
which a practitioner would call a phenomenon while one studying the scriptures
would call an object of ultimate reality (paramattha).Once ready to practice, we
should: be aware (or have right mindfulness), of the object of consciousness, or

                                         101


phenomenon, or object of ultimate reality, arising at the present moment, with a
stable mind which does not wander out and is not controlled or over-focused (or
have right concentration), and the mind will see things as they truly are (with
clear comprehension and right-view). To be aware means to know when
something is arising, changing, and disappearing. For example, when we are
happy, know that happiness has arisen; and when happiness gone, know that
happiness has disappeared. When there is anger, know that anger has arisen; and
when anger gone, know that anger has disappeared. When the mind has craving
and clings to sense objects through the eyes, ears, nose, mouth, body or mind,
be aware of the force of desire at work. The object of consciousness, or mind-
object, that arises has to be of ultimate reality, not conventional reality. We
must be able to differentiate between what is absolute reality, or paramattha
dhamma and what is conventional reality, or sammuti. For example, when the
mind is happy, there must be awareness of the state of happiness. When the
mind is angry, there must be awareness of the state of anger. When the mind is
in doubt, there must be awareness of the state of doubt. As we continue to
practice, we will discover that most mental phenomena arise from somewhere in
the middle of the chest, which is regarded as the physical basis of the mind, or
hadaya-vatthu. There is no need to search for an exact location, but just be
aware of where the defilements arise and disappear. This is because if we focus
our awareness at a wrong target, the real truth will never be revealed.

                                          102


For example, if we fix our attention at the middle of the body, two inches above
the navel, we will never be able to detect any defilement arising, but instead will
only create a mental image or nimitta. To be truly mindful does not mean we
have to question ourselves or to guess whether at this moment there is
happiness, suffering, anger, doubt or craving. It is very important to stress that
we must be mindful of the actual phenomena of the mind, or the absolute
reality, because the mind needs to witness and learn from the actual arising,
changing and disappearing of all things on its own, and not via the thinking
process.
       Once we are mindful of the mental phenomena as they arise, the mind
needs to have sufficient stability and firmness to avoid getting lost in thoughts
that commonly arise after the awareness. For example, when something arises
in the mind, it is ultimate reality. After that, a thought based on conventional
reality arises, labeling this mental state as liking, for example. This formulation
cannot be avoided, because the mind's nature is to think and recollect.
Therefore, we must not try to prevent or refuse the thinking process based on
conventional reality from happening. Just be aware of it but do not get lost in
the thinking process. Continue to be mindful of phenomena of mind that arise,
such as liking in this case. Only through observation will we be able to see the
three characteristics of existence of that condition. On the other hand, a
practitioner who is mindful of the mental phenomena must not focus too

                                           103


intently because this will result in an unrefined mind that cannot gain wisdom.
Instead of being aware of mental phenomena as they truly are, when the mind
identifies and grabs on to a state, it will become stagnant.
        We have to let the mind be an observer, like an audience watching a play
and not jumping on to the stage to play along with the actors. The mind that has
right concentration possesses the following qualities of mind: stability,
gentleness, pliability and readiness to work. It does not get lost or over-focused.
When there is right concentration, the mind is fully ready for true development
of wisdom.
       When mindful of objects of ultimate reality, with a stable mind, and not
getting lost or over focused, the mind will learn four ultimate truths as follows:
       a. It will learn of the natural phenomenon as it arises, exists and passes
away (awareness of the natural phenomenon).
       b. It will learn of the role of that natural phenomenon which has arisen
(awareness of the function of the natural phenomenon).
       c. It will learn of the outcome of that natural phenomenon (awareness of
the consequence).
       d. And with constant awareness it will learn of the thing that makes that
natural phenomenon arise (awareness of the proximate cause). When the mind
itself learns through observation, known as investigation of the truth or

                                        104


dhamma-vicaya, this process is in fact the cultivation of wisdom, or clear
comprehension and right view.
      An example is when the eyes detect an image. The mind processes the
image to be a beautiful girl. Then liking arises. To know that liking has arisen
is correct awareness. And sometimes liking is so strong and the mind wants to
look some more. At this stage the mind has been dominated by craving,
and thinks, acts and desires accordingly. Only if we keep on observing craving
with frequency will the mind know that seeing something beautiful is the
proximate cause of craving. Therefore it is important to constantly be aware
when the eyes see an object. As for the function of craving itself, with
mindfulness, it will reveal its impermanent nature instantly that its intensity and
duration are neither constant nor long lasting, and will eventually disappear if
there is no new input (such as looking back at the beautiful woman).
      This shows the unsatisfactoriness inherent in this state of mind. The
arising and passing of all things are the result of some set of causes and
conditions, not of our wishes or how we would like them to be. Furthermore
they are just objects of consciousness and not within our control, showing the
non-self nature of craving.

                                     105
      3.10 ) Process of Practicing Vipassana
Practice Samatha
Focus in the breath                 STEP 1
(Buddho)
1st type of Samadhi ( bject
-examination )



    Practice Vipassana Focus on
    the Mind and the breath (           STEP 2
    Characteristic Examination) 2 nd
    Of Samadhi Practice to be " the
    Knower"



       Practice Vipassana , Practice
       Step 2 over and over until Mind      STEP 3
       turn to Stable Mind ,Mind stay
       on itself and can observe the
       phenomena is not the Mind



            Practice Vipassana ,Firm and
           stable mind ,seperate the Nama       STEP 4
           and Rupa ( Body and mind)-
           seperate Five Khanha




                 Observe the three characteristic  STEP 5
                of the Five Khanhas

                                          106


                    3.10.1 ) STEP 1 ) practice Samatha Concentration
( A mindfulness of the body -KAYANUPASSANA)
The purpose : To make your mind calm down and peaceful and to study
about the first type of samadhi. which will bring your mind to rest and in
peaceful state.
      The first kind of samadhi is called object-examination (aramma-
n'upanijjhana). This is when there is just one object of attention and the mind
sticks to this object and is rendered still. The mind is very focused and
peaceful in this state. An example is meditation on breathing. The mind moves
down into the breath and clings to it. the first type of samadhi, object-
examination, is accomplished during calmness meditation, otherwise known as
Samatha meditation. Even using the mind itself as the object of meditation can
bring us into this type of samadhi.
      1. To begin the practice, you should sit in a comfortable position,
cross- leg on the floor or on the chair. It is important to sit up straight to
assit your breathing, make it easier to observe in- breath ( inhalation) and
out- breath ( exhalation ).
      2.Once seated , Pay attention and focus in your nose only when
you breathing in you say with yourself " Bhud" and when you breathing
out you say to yourself " Dho" Just be aware when you are inhaling or

                                      107


exhaling. You may take a deep breath for a couple of times and then let
it go normally and naturally .
      3.Observe your inhalation and exhalation when it's a long breath and
sometimes it's short. And observe the feeling when you have a long
breath and the short breath. How is it different ?
      4.Observe the area that your inhalation make a contact in your nostril
and you see it clear when you breath in. Observe the area that your
exhalation make a contact when you breath out . After this fix one spot
that you feel your inhalation and exhalation touch this spot every time
and pay attention in this spot only. and then keep on breathing in " Bhud"
breathing out " Dho"
      5.The technique of the practice Samatha is that The meditation object
that we choose should make the mind happy and the mind should enjoy
watching it . If our mind likes the breath and feels good watching the
breath, then we use the breath. If it feels good with the mantra " buddho"
then we use a mantra. Whatever we do , the mind has to be comfortable
and like being with the object. When the mind is very happy with
something it will stay with it. It won't go anywhere else on its own. This
is the attitude we need in order to bring the mind into the peaceful states
of absorption concentration or jhana.

                    108




         STEP 1 )          practice Samatha Concentration
        ( A mindfulness of the body -KAYANUPASSANA)
        practice the first type of Samadhi ,we focus and
        concentrate at our nose,we pay attention 100% to the in-
        breath and out- breath,no matter it's long or short, coarse
        or fined, we aware it all.




breathing in-Bhud




        breathing out-DHO

                                        109


Samatha concentration give us a calm down mind and peaceful but not a
wisdom. we have to do next step to Vipassansa or Insight meditation.

                   3.10.2 ) STEP 2 : Practicing Vipassana or Insight
meditation ( Cittanupassana- A mindfulness of the Mind )
As we mention earlier , when we are looking to practice Vipassana meditation,
then we need the second kind of samadhi. It is called characteristic-examination
(lakkha-n'upanijjhana). This samadhi is one that is stable in the sense that it
remains separate from phenomena. It allows us to see the true characteristics
of body and mind, of mental and physical phenomena (rupa-nama). We may
see the body is not us but is just matter, or the working of elements, or just
processes of sensory input and interpretation. In the second type of samadhi,
the mind is the stable and unattached watcher or knower.
       " The Knower" VS. " The thinker"
First of all before we do the practice , we should know the nature of our
mind , " If our mind be a knower it can't be a thinker. In the same
way if our mind be a thinker it can't be a knower. It means that our
mind can be both a knower and a thinker but not in the same time."
        The way to practice this is to pick a meditation object like
watching the breath or the mantra" Bhuddho" , or watching the body
walking , sitting , standing like the lesson 1 practicing only, instead of

                                       110


staying with this meditation object and trying to keep the mind still or
stop thinking , we use the meditation object as the background and
notice in the foreground instead. We notice the mind who know the
breath. When we sit we awareness the body is breathing in and out .We
carefully observe the body is sitting the mind is a knower , the body is
breathing the mind is a knower. We observe back- and- forth between the
breath and the mind. We do it over and over again until we become to
feel about the know is knowing the breath not us.
              While we observing the mind or the knower ,when we see
the thought is arisen up , we should aware the thought too.
When the mind goes off to think we should know it . We don' try to
stop the mind from thinking . We let it think as it does normally, but
we notice that it's thinking . We start breathing in, when mind goes off to
think, we know it. Then we are breathing out ,the mind goes off to think
again , and we know it again. The knower is the mind that knows. The
object is that which the mind is knowing. When we are watching an object,
know when the mind has gone off to think. Know the body is breathing or the
body is moving and then know when the mind has strayed from knowing the
chosen object. Keep knowing the object and then know when the mind sinks
into the object or when it moves to something else. When the mind moves off
to think, know this too. If we continuously are able to notice on time when the

                111




STEP 2: The Knower: Sit relax and observe
breath in and out normally. But observe the
mind when it go off to the thought , as soon
as we know that the mind is thinking . The
mind will become a knower for a short time.
We 'll do it over and over until it stable.




   Breating in - Bud



 Breathing out - Dho

                                         112


mind is moving towards the object to focus in on it, or away from the object to
get lost in something else, then the mind will become the knower or watcher.
It will separate out as" the one who knows, the awakened and joyful one". It
is the opposite of the one who is lost, infatuated or entranced. The lost one is
the thinker, deluded and entranced in a fabricated reality. We need to learn to be
the watcher or knower and rise above the thinker and the world of fabrication.
          The knower (samadhi of the second kind) arises when we practice
meditation When it arises, it does so with either happiness or equanimity. We
cannot intend for the knower to arise. It arises of its own accord when the mind
has enough fortitude. The idea about fortitude can be illustrated in the case of
someone who is perpetually bad. Such a person doesn't need to intend to do bad
things because he is bad already. The badness has fortitude and momentum.
thus unseemly acts are committed effortlessly, without prompting. Good people
do good things with ease as well. Many of us can notice that our minds naturally
want to read or listen to the Dhamma without any prompting. Similarly, the
knower arises unprompted out of the fortitude of our practice. We must practice
to wake our minds up out of the world of thought and fabrication. The thinker
opposes the knower; when we are not knowing, we are thinking, interpreting,
and fabricating. Our practice is to simply know whenever the mind leaves the
object of our attention. Notice when it goes out think, see, hear, smell, taste
or feel. Notice when it sinks down to cling to a meditation object as well.

                                         113


        If we do this repeatedly, we will reach the second kind of Samadhi,
characteristic-examination, and the mind will be in the appropriate state to
practice Vipassana. For both kinds of Samadhi, the principles are quite easy. In
the first kind, choose an object in the body or mind that we are happy with.
When the mind is happy, it will stay concentrated and have no need to look for
happiness elsewhere. In the second kind, we watch a meditation object
and notice whenever the mind goes away from.
        Let's take the example of the mantra "Buddho" as our meditation object.
We could just as easily choose the breath, the body or part thereof.
For the first kind of samadhi, we practice Samatha. We happily keep our
attention on the repeated word "Bhuddho". The mind eventually stays with and
clings to "Bhuddho". It becomes still and peaceful. If we are practicing the
second kind of samadhi, we keep the mind on "Bhuddho" just the same, but our
perspective is different. Instead of staying with "Bhuddho" to become calm and
still, our objective is to recognize each time mind has left "Bhuddho" and
recognize each time the mind over-focuses on it. The knower will arise and can
walk the path of Vipassana wisdom. It will watch mental and physical
phenomena passing by from a distance, and it will do so with impartiality.
It is as if we are standing on the riverbank and watching the water flow
downstream.

                                         114


      Firstly, we need to have mindfulness recognizing what arises in the body
and mind. Then "to know bodily and mental phenomena as they really are"
means that wisdom sees their true three characteristics. In order to have the
wisdom that sees the Three Characteristics, the mind must be stable and
impartial to phenomena. The knower, the awakened one is the one that is stable.
By stability, It mean the mind remains rooted in awareness; it is not attached to
phenomena and doesn't slip down into them. It also doesn't get lost in liking or
disliking what arises. It is impartial, unbiased, equanimous. Keep practicing to
develop mindfulness, develop samadhi and develop wisdom.
             3.10.3 ) STEP 3 ) practice " Stable mind "
      Next step after we got the knower ,we have to bring our mind to be
stable. To do this we need to developing such a mind that is wholesome,
that is stable observer of the body and mind and conducive to wisdom,
is called momentary concentration. The way to achieve it is to choose an
object like the breath from the lesson 1.Instead of to make the mind rest
and be comfortable and peaceful with the object, we observe the mind
from this place instead. We keep this object as one main object and we
set the mind free.
      What will happen of course is the mind will go off to think. Then
we observe or know the mind went off to think. Then the mind may go
back and try to hold to that meditation object. Then we observe or know

                                       115


that it has gone to hold to the object. Then right away it might go off to
think again. We observe or know that the mind has gone off to think
again right away. The mind will oscillate between going off to think and
going back to the object and trying to hold to it. We must observe the
movements of the mind.
      It's important to know that we are not practicing this to try to keep
the mind peacefully with the object . If we choose the breath, we are
not trying to stay with the breath . We are just trying to see what the
mind does from this place. We start by breathing and then the mind
goes to think .We know that it went to think. The mind goes back to the
object , and we know it went back to the object. The mind goes to
think again , and we know that it went to think again.
      We do this over and over again and the experience of the observer
or knower , the stable mind , that has this correct type of concentration
will arise. Only it will arise just for a very short moment, each time that
we notice that the mind moves out to think, see, hear or feel. When we
observe or know the mind goes out to think, the mind will be the stable
mind or the observer for just a moment. If we do this again and again
,over and over , the experience of the observer or the stable mind will
stay longer. The mind will be light and bright and comfortable and will
be the observer of body and mind.

             116




STEP 3: STABLE MIND :When the stable
observer is achieved , it see the body and at
the distance. It is a feeling of separation or "
out of body " experience. The mind separates
out and see the body breathing " Bud-dho"

                              117




      STEP 4 : Seperate Nama -Rupa :When the stable
      observe arises, one is the watcher and the other is being
      watched.There will be the five aggrigates to watch, the
      body,feeling,memory,the formations,and the
      consciousness.



                                           Vedan ( Feeling )

                    Sann ( Memory)




Sangkar ( Formations)




                        Consciousness ( Mind )




 The Body : Comprised of the
 earth,water,wind and fire
 elements

                                       118


                    3.10.3.1 ) The result after we practice this step

When we watch the body as in Vipassana meditation. We can choose any
observable phenomenon of the body, such as the breath, the rising and falling
of the abdomen,. In the case of the abdomen, we can see that there is rising and
falling occurring there, and the mind merely watches this. The mind must be
the watcher, an independent phenomenon from the object. The mind does not
sink down to the breath but is rooted in awareness, . the mind sees the body is
breathing in. It sees the body breathing out. The mind watches the body stand,
walk, sit and lay down. It watches the hands and arms moving and stretching
and so on. It sees the body doing what it does. The mind is just the watcher. The
body moves and the mind watches. The body ceases to be ours. This body
moves, but it is not us moving. True mindfulness arises. The mind awakens and
sees that the body is not us , it's only the five aggregates which are
                    3.10.3.2 ) Khandhas or Aggregates (Body and mind)
Aggregates : The five function that constitute a human life, These groups
are not entities in themselves; they are merely the categories into which all
aspects of our lives can be analyzed. None of them are a " self" , nor do
they have anything to do with selfhood, nor is there any " self" apart
from them.The five are:
             a) Rupa-khanha, body, kaya, the five aggregates

                                     119


( corporeality)something composed of various elements , organs, or parts.
Generally used for the physical body ; refer to either the whole body or its
parts ( breath-body and flesh - body)
            b) Vedana - feeling, sensation: the mental quality that      sense
experiences ( phassa) . There are three kinds:
                  sukkha-vedana, pleasant, nice, delicious feeling
                  dukkha -vadana, unpleasant, disagreeable, painful feeling
                  adukkha-massukkha-vedana, neither-unpleasant -nor-pleasant
            c) Sann- ( perception is awareness resulting from the reaction
between the sense organs and sense objects.
            d) Sankhara - Mental formations are volitional activities of the
mind to commit wholesome , unwholesome deeds or neutral acts, under the
influence of good or bad will, such as fait, mindfulness, conscience and
compunction, the four noble sentiments, wisdom, defilement and obsession
            e) Vinnn-Sense consciousness: knowing sense objects or
concerns through the six sense doors( eyes, ears, nose, mouth, body, mind)
Vinn is the fundamental mental activity required for participation in
sensual world ; without it there is no experience.

                                         120


                   3.10.3.3 ) What will we achieve with mindfulness
practice?
After we 've got the knower and being aware of our mind continuously and
with ease, we can see all kinds of objects of consciousness pass through the
mind. The mind will select the object that is most prominent at each moment.
Therefore any of the four foundations of mindfulness can be practiced. On the
contrary, if we cannot distinguish between the mind and the object of
consciousness, then development of the four foundations of mindfulness will be
difficult. When we say concentration development is the basis for insight
development, or concentration is the proximate cause of wisdom, is because
wrong concentration development will make the mind be influenced by the
object of consciousness. Right concentration development will make the mind
gain clear comprehension, unbiased by the object of consciousness and,
therefore, clearly see its true nature, how it arises and passes away, as follow.
                   a) Awareness of the body (kyanupassan)
When there is awareness of the body, such as sensing the breathing in and out,
or noticing the cold air making contact with and cooling the body,
or feeling the body get tired and perspire on a hot sunny day, or observing the
body move as we do in walking meditation, those who have developed
the conscious mind will see that the body as a collection of many elements that
moves around just like a robot, and that there is not a single part that can be

                                          121


called ours. When doing walking meditation until the legs get sore, we can see
that the legs themselves do not complain. The separation between body and
mind become distinct, and we can see the three characteristics of existence of
the body with clarity.
                    b) Awareness of feelings (vedannupassan)
Sometimes, when we are aware of the mind, we also become aware of feelings,
sometimes through the body and sometimes through the mind, depending
on which is more prominent at that moment. For example, when doing walking
meditation our legs become stiff, if the conscious mind is present, we will
clearly see that this feeling of stiffness is not the legs, but is something that is
hidden within the legs. Or when sitting in the heat a cool breeze passes by, we
feel comfortable and relaxed. This feeling of comfort and relaxation arises from
somewhere within the body, but is not the body. The body itself does not feel
the comfort. Or when we have a toothache, if our conscious mind is present, we
will clearly see that this aching feeling is not from the tooth, nor from the mind,
but is another thing, another aggregate or khandha. The pain is not constant, but
changes in intensity all the time, showing the three characteristics of existence
of feeling, or vedana-khandha. Feelings can be clearly seen through the mind.
For example, pain from a toothache can be felt through the physical body, and
sometimes through the mind as well, such as feeling sad and worried in this

                                          122


case. Sometimes when we eat something we like, even before tasting the food in
the mouth, we already feel happy. When aware of feelings while being aware of
the conscious mind, the three characteristics of existence of feeling can be seen
with clarity.
                   c) Awareness of Mind (cittanupassan)
Awareness of mind is actually not awareness of the conscious mind, or the
"absolute mind" (also called "one mind" or "pure mind" in Zen) but
rather awareness of mental formations, of thoughts and emotions or citta-
sankhara that arise. An example is awareness of the arising and passing away
of anger, desire, confusion or happiness. These mental formations are not the
mind, but just objects of consciousness. Awareness of mental formations
while being aware of the conscious mind is the clearest way to see the three
characteristics of existence of mental formations.
                   d) Awareness of Mind-Objects (dhammanupassan)
With awareness of the conscious mind, whatever arises will show its true
characteristics. For example, while being mindful, if the mind thinks
of a loved one, it will become absorbed in the thought process. We will then
clearly see that the mind clings to the notion of mind as self because
it ignorantly identifies itself with the object of consciousness. This sense of self,
aggregate, or heaviness arises from nothingness initially. However, if we are
aware that whenever the mind grasps on to something, suffering arises, we will

                                         123


let go and return to just being mindful. The aggregate, heaviness, denseness, or
suffering will eventually disappear. This in fact is the realization of the Four
Noble Truths. We will see that when there is craving, an urge to grasps on to an
object of consciousness, the sense of self arises, followed by suffering. If there
is no craving, then suffering cannot arise.
      Awareness of natural phenomena while being mindful of the conscious
mind is the clearest way to see the three characteristics of existence of the mind.
We will see that the mind is not in our control. It goes out and grasps on to
objects by itself. And when the mind realizes that grasping causes suffering, it
will eventually stop. Nothing is within our control.
                    3.10.4) STEP 4 ) separation of matter and mind
( nama - rupa)
       When consciousness is firm and neutral in mindfulness of Matter and
Mind and is automatically mindful, what is called "a self" will dissipate to show
what it actually is, i.e. Matter and Mind. If mindfulness and wisdom mature,
insight will further dissipate Mind into feeling, perception, mental formation
and consciousness. It will also dissipate Matter into eyes, ears, nose, tongue and
body or into earth, water, fire and air elements. The dissipation of Matter and
Mind through insight is the beginning of disillusionment of the wrong view of
an abiding "self". This is preliminary insight gained through training in
wisdom.

                                      124


      After we've got the knower so we have the stable mind, we have
the mind to be the observer , we can develop the path of wisdom. we
will see the truth. We will see that the body that is walking around,
sitting , moving , brushing it's teeth , is just a mass. The body is a
physical mass that is not owned by anyone, and it isn't anyone. It's not a
person . It's just a physical mass that belong to the world, that belongs to
the nature.
      We will see that the body is one thing and the consciousness or the
observer that sees the body is a totally separate thing. We will start to
gain wisdom into way that things truly are. We will see that the mind
with all the different thoughts and the heart with all the different feelings
don't belong to anyone either. Feelings are just feelings, emotions are just
emotions and thoughts are just thoughts. They don't belong to anyone .
We will see this and gain wisdom with the proper type of concentration.
             3.10.5 ) STEP 5) See the three characteristics of the Khandha
(The five aggregates)
       Seeing the rising and falling/changing of Matter and Mind
After Matter and Mind dissipate, we will realize that each Matter and each Mind
perform their own functions, including rising, falling and changing at all times.
For example, consciousness will see Matter inhaling and exhaling, sitting and

                        125




STEP 5: See the three characteristics of body and mind.
The wisdom that sees the arising and falling of mental and
physical phenomena renders the mind dispassionate
towards things .The mind stop struggling to keep or push
away any state or mind. When there is no more struggle and
no more attachment to any state, the mind will be free from
even the subtlest of impurities.

                                          126


standing, standing and walking, moving and holding still, etc. Alternatively,
consciousness will see that mindlessness arises and vanishes, there is little space
in between, and then new consciousness arises to recollect that it was mindless
just now. All these lead to insight of the rising, falling and changing of
Matter and Mind. It is the beginning point of disillusionment of the wrong view
of Matter and Mind as an animal, a human being, a self; and liberation from
clinging to Matter and Mind will follow.
      When the power of our mindfulness is really excelling, we see that the
mind or consciousness arises at the eyes and then falls away; it arises in
thought, thinking occurs, and then the mind or consciousness falls away. Each
mind of wholesome state arises and falls. Each mind moment that is greedy,
angry, lost in thought, restless or upset arises and then falls away. Life breaks
up into slices. Each mind comes and goes. It is not the same mind from birth
until death. That is a delusion. The mind is different one in each moment. Why
do we need to see the truth? It is so that we can see that the mind isn't us. It's a
new mind every moment. It is never the same mind. It changes from one that is
aware., to the new one that is thinking, to the new one that is over-focusing, and
so on. If we can see that the mind arises at a time and then falls away, like
separate mental moments, the we can see the truth of is continuity. Our sense
organs that perceive things as fluid and continuous are deceiving us and are thus
fabricating a self that doesn't really exist.

                                          127


      Continuity is just an illusion because things are arising and falling away
so quickly. It is an illusion that blinds us from seeing what is really going on.
If one day we clearly see in our experience that the mind is not us, then nothing
in the world will be mistaken as us ever again.
      The body is experienced is not us from much earlier on in our
development of mindfulness. Whenever the mind is awake and aware , the
body is seen as a separate thing. What is left to unveil. then is that the mind is
not us either. We will see that it is running here and there at first, and then as
our mindful grows further, we see more clearly that it is not actually running
but arising and falling at each place, such as the eyes ,the ears or in thinking.
When the continuity is broken like this, we can say that we are truly at the level
of Vipassana. If there is not yet discontinuity, then it isn't genuine Vipassana.
      We have to keep practicing to see the continuity break. When this insight
into the truth first happens, it really can shake up our world. Some people
become frightened . Some people become bored. Others feel empty, like their
essence is missing, and can't find their footing; they can't find anything solid to
rely on anymore. Some people become so bored , they lose passion for
everything in the world. They are disinterested in both happiness and un
happiness. They lose passion for everything and everyone, include their spouse.
This dispassion, however, is not an impurity of mind. It is a natural step in the
process of enlightenment. This mind is bored or dispassionate because it has

                                        128


mindfulness and wisdom that sees everything is nonsensical and insubstantial.
It becomes equally bored of pleasure and pain, equally bored of good and bad,
equally bored with thing coarse and things subtle, and equally bored of internal
experiences and external experiences. At this stage it is dispassionate to
absolutely everything. The mind stops persuing anything. But some people get
very frightened indeed. When they practice to the point where they see what
they thought was themselves disappear, some people become absolutely
terrified.
                    3.11 ) Disenchantment and discernment of the truth of
unsubstantial nature, suffering and harm from Mind and Matter
After more and more seeing of the rising and falling of Matter and Mind, some
may be disenchanted with all conditioned states because they have realized that
happiness arises and then vanishes. It is not pleasurable. Suffering arises and
vanishes. It is not miserable. Moral consciousness arises and vanishes. It is not
pleasant. Immoral consciousness arises and vanishes. It is not unpleasant.
Whatever arises will vanish. It is neither pleasant nor unpleasant. Joy and grief
are equally boring. Good and evil are equally boring. Some may view Matter
and Mind as some natural phenomena of existence that are not self. Their selves
are gone. A void, dread or the truth of unsubstantial nature may come to mind.
These are feelings of insight practitioners. Some may get stuck at this stage for
a long time while others may not take a long time to pass through this stage.

                                         129




             3.12 ) Neutrality to conditioned states
After more and more mindfulness of Matter and Mind, consciousness will
realize that boredom, dreadfulness or any other feeling whatsoever is only an
object of conscious that passes by. Consciousness will become firm and neutral
to all conditioned states despite no will to maintain neutrality. This is a very
important step of insight development. One who practices mindfulness up to
this stage will be very blissful and will feel unshaken when touched by worldly
vicissitudes. However, neutrality at this stage is still uncertain. Some may not
be able to sustain it and become biased again while others may unexpectedly
progress by leaps and bounds in Dhamma.
             3.13 ) Mindfulness of mind may alternate between
concentration and insight meditation
When observing the mind or body, the mind may switch back and forth between
concentration and insight meditations. In most textbooks, concentration and
insight meditations are differentiated based on the subject of meditation. For
example, if we practice the 40 subjects of meditation, such as the 10
recollections or anussati, we are doing concentration meditation. If we practice
the four foundations of mindfulness, which are awareness of body, feelings,
mind and mind-objects, then we are doing insight meditation. If the object of
mindfulness is conventional or relative reality, then we are doing concentration

                                         130


meditation. But if the object is ultimate reality, then we are doing insight
meditation. In actuality there is more to all this. Distinction
between concentration and insight meditations can be made based on the type of
activity of the mind.
       For example, whenever the mind is mindful of one object continuously,
this is concentration meditation. Continuing to be mindful until the mind rests
on that object without any added control or intention, the mind will become one
with the object, resulting in bliss and tranquility. This is a state of meditative
absorption, or jhana, a direct result of concentration meditation. However,
when we are mindful of any object of consciousness that naturally arises and at
the same time has clear comprehension, this is awareness of mind. In other
words, when the conscious mind and the object of consciousness are clearly
distinguished, we will see the arising and passing away of ultimate reality. This
is insight meditation. At some point in practice, once the mind no longer needs
to hold the intention to be aware of objects or to maintain the conscious mind,
it will develop mindfulness and clear comprehension on its own. When it all
happens automatically, then this is genuine insight meditation.
       A person doing concentration meditation is like someone who has fallen
into a river and, swimming in it, is unable to see things clearly. Whereas a
person doing insight meditation is like someone sitting on the bank of the river
and, watching the current passing by, is able to see with a clearer perspective

                                          131


the river and all the things floating in it, some of which may be clean and
beautiful, while others dirty and unattractive. This is why it is essential to be
able to distinguish between the conscious mind and the object of consciousness
before doing contemplation of the mind or contemplation of the body. An
example is contemplating on human skeleton by focusing the mind on features
such as length or shape, concentrating on one of the four basic elements  earth
in this case. Focusing the mind on the white color of the bones would be
concentrating on the color. This focus of the mind until it attains tranquility and
becomes fixed on the bone's shape or color is concentration meditation. Even
by contemplating on the bone as an element, an aggregate or part of a decaying
body, we are still doing concentration meditation because the whole
process is still a thinking process. But if we are aware of the bones, with the
conscious mind stable and separate, and contemplate on the bone's three
characteristics of existence, then this is the beginning of insight meditation. And
while doing insight meditation through awareness of the body, sometimes the
mind is fixed on to a certain part of the body, briefly switching over to
concentration meditation and then back out to awareness of the body again. Or
sometimes the mind goes overboard and focuses too strongly on the awareness
and becomes scattered and restless. When this happens we must step back and
deconcentration meditation until the mind regains strength and able to separate
itself from the object of consciousness, and then resume with insight meditation.

                                          132


Mindfulness of mind can be both concentration and insight meditations. If we
intently focus on the emptiness of the mind or transfix on any particular part of
the mind, this is concentration practice. If, however, we are aware of ultimate
reality, which is the arising and passing away of all objects, with the conscious
mind clearly separate, then this is insight practice. In fact, when we are aware of
the mind doing insight meditation, the mind will occasionally focus on a certain
object, switching to concentration meditation on its own. We should be able to
differentiate whether the mind is practicing concentration or insight meditation.
Otherwise, we may mistakenly think we are practicing insight meditation while
actually practicing concentration meditation.
      For practitioners whose teachers lack intuitive knowledge of the states of
students' minds, it is easy to get off track without knowing. For example, while
doing walking meditation and focusing on lifting, moving, and placing the feet,
the mind may be fixed to the feet or get lost in thinking about the lifting,
moving, and placing of the feet. This is purely concentration meditation without
clear comprehension, or awareness of the mind. Another danger in not being
able to differentiate between concentration and insight meditation is it may lead
to a refined form of defilement, called defilement of insight, or
vipassanupakilesa. This may happen during insight meditation, when the mind
switches back to concentration meditation and experiences something that
misleads it into thinking that it has been enlightened. Some examples are

                                          133


mindfulness of object of consciousness with a mind that is stiff and
unwholesome, as opposed to a mind that is soft, light, pliable and conducive to
insight meditation. The mind may reach a wrong understanding and cannot
differentiate between conventional truth, or sammati-sacca, and absolute truth,
or paramattha-sacca. Or it may have a wrong view that there is no such thing as
the Buddha, there is no such thing as parents, and everything in the world is
empty. This is in denial of the existence of conventional concepts, thinking that
there is nothing at all. With regard to the conventional world, these concepts do
exist and should not be denied. In fact, when practicing awareness of mind, the
mind naturally switches back and forth between concentration and insight
meditations, enabling some practitioners to attain absorption automatically,
without any special training at all.
              3.14 ) To advance from common objects of consciousness to
refined state of void Once we are skillful at being aware of the mind, we will
see that any object that arises in the mind will eventually disappear, just like a
moth flying into the fire. At first, we will detect only common emotions, such
as anger. But with further practice we will notice with clarity the faintest
irritation or satisfaction that arises. For example, on a hot day, when a cool
breeze blows softly on the skin, the mind feels pleased and liking arises. Or
when we need to go to the toilet, just as we start to release, the mind already
feels happy. Or when we are hungry, once we see food approaching, the mind is

                                          134


already satisfied. The examples are numerous. Once refined objects of
consciousness can be detected, there is less opportunity for coarse ones to arise.
This is because coarse objects of consciousness arise from refined ones. One
very important principle, which needs to be stressed in observing the mind, is
simply to be aware. We should not try to let go of any object of consciousness,
because that would be moving in exactly the wrong direction. All objects of
consciousness are aggregates, are suffering. Therefore, we should just be aware,
without desire to rid of them. Otherwise this would contradict the Noble Truth,
in which the Buddha teaches "be aware of suffering, and eradicate it's cause."
The more we desire to rid of anything, the deeper will we be lost in wrong view.
For example, when anger appears in the mind, the Buddha teaches to simply be
aware. However, sometimes we try to find a way to get rid of the anger and it
disappears. Then we falsely conclude that we are able to eradicate defilement,
that the defilement or the mind is self because it can be controlled. When in fact
the defilement disappears because it's cause is gone. Another example is when
we get scolded. As we think of the reason why we get scolded, anger arises and
grows in intensity. And if we think of ways to get rid of this anger, then the
cause of the anger, which is the thought of the harsh words, is no longer there.
Once the cause is gone, anger automatically subsides and we will again wrongly
believe we can get rid of anger. Repeatedly when we encounter a new
defilement, we will try to get rid of it, creating unnecessary burden for the mind.

                                          135


Once we become aware of the objects of consciousness with more frequency
and clarity, accordingly these objects will also become more and more refined.
We must understand that the mind, objects of consciousness, mindfulness and
clear comprehension, and even concentration development, are all subject to
the three characteristics of existence. Therefore, once the mind reaches a state of
refinement, it will inevitably switch back to being coarse again. Do not be
alarmed, as this is natural. Keep on with the practice. It is all right and the mind
will continue to progress. Once the objects of consciousness reach a state of
utmost refinement, the mind will appear to be
in a state of void. At this point, we may falsely believe that the defilements are
completely gone, when in fact this emptiness is just another object of
consciousness, though in it's most refined state. These days, there are many
who proclaim to live their lives with void minds. However they don't know the
true meaning of a void mind and they don't realize that even this void mind is
not a true refuge because it is still subject to the three characteristics of
existence. More importantly, those who strive to attain a void mind are very far
from this state because they do not even understand the common objects of
consciousness.
                    3.15 )To let go of the void mind and reach the ultimate
reality Once the mind has reached a state of utmost refinement, the next step
remains the same, which is to continue to be aware. There is no need to doubt or

                                         136


investigate to find ways to let go of such void. This is because all of these
thought processes are distractions to the mind. All we have to do is simply be
aware. Awareness without thinking is insight meditation in its most refined
form. Please note that the liberated mind will let go on its own once it knows
the truth directly. Through the thinking process, which is based on memories
and recollections, we can only gain conventional knowledge. As for the
ultimate truth, the mind must learn on it's own. We need only to prepare a
supportive environment for the mind to progress. Do not interfere with
the mind, and be mindful with clear comprehension. Be aware without thinking
or searching for anything. Eventually, the mind will realize that even a void
mind is of no importance. As long as we believe that the mind is self or that it
belongs to us and needs to be set free, then craving, which is the cause of
suffering, will keep creating the environment for the void mind again and again.
Let us be clear that, at this stage, the mind will do insight meditation
automatically  it is no longer the work of the practitioner. Therefore, we
can say that no one can intentionally or deliberately reach enlightenment or
Nibbana, because it is all the mind's doing.
                    3.16 ) To attain the first stage of Enlightenment, the
Stream-Entry, or Sotpanna, and follow the Path to attainment of Holiness,
or Arahatta-magga When the mind is fully aware and without any thought
processes, at some point, when something arises in the consciousness, the mind

                                          137


will not attribute any meaning to it and simply be aware of its arising and
passing away. This is the most refined stage of insight meditation. At some
point, the mind will go through a major transformation, the details of which
will not be elaborated upon here because the reader may try to use the
information to mentally fabricate such a phenomenon. To enter the Path to
Enlightenment, awareness must always be present without any thinking
processes and without giving any significance to the arising of refined mental
formations. Some teachers wrongly state that when one attains enlightenment,
the mind totally loses consciousness. This is because of misinterpretation in the
Buddha's teaching that "the absolute truth of Enlightenment is void, or
Nibbanang paramang sunnang." This particular wrong view of void is the
nihilist view, or uccheda-ditthi. The attainment of enlightenment is not like
this. Loss of consciousness is another kind of becoming, or bhava, called asanni,
associated with living unconscious beings that the ancient Thais call "phrom-
lookfak", or realm of non-percipient beings. Immediately after the realization of
the first stage of enlightenment, the stream-enterer will deeply realize the way
of Dhamma  that all that arise will pass away. An entity continues to exist, but
there is no longer self, not even a remnant. Seeing the truth that body and mind
is not self is the knowledge that is gained at the stream-entry stage. However
clinging to self is still there because to release all clinging requires a higher
level of understanding. After reaching what is conventionally called stream-

                                         138


entry, the practitioner should continue the practice as before. The conscious
mind will become more and more prominent until reaching the once-returning
or anagame stage, where the conscious mind will be fully eminent because it is
free from all sense-desires. This behavior of the mind, where the mind is aware
of only itself, shows the full power of concentration meditation. At this point,
the primary hindrance to concentration, which is sense-desire, is eradicated
from the mind. If a practitioner is to die at this point, he or she would only be
reborn in the fine-material or immaterial (Brahma) world and would no longer
return to the human realm. Numerous practitioners, who do not have the
guidance of a teacher, will think that once this stage is reached, where the
conscious mind does not have any impurities, there is no more work to do. On
the contrary, Luang Pu Dulya Atulo further instructed that once the knower is
discovered, destroy him; and once the mind is discovered, destroy it too. This
statement is not just a play on word. The true meaning of this teaching is that
we need to again let go of clinging to the mind. This process is so refined that if
the awareness is not refined enough, we will not know what to further let go of.
Since even the knower or the conscious mind is subject to the three
characteristics of existence, sometimes it will have some slight impurity, just
enough to reveal the three characteristics. A practitioner under good guidance
will just see this attachment without reacting. The mind will maintain awareness
without engaging in thinking or searching for anything. It will be utterly still,

                                          139


until at one point it will let go of attachment to itself. Only then will the mind be
totally liberated, boundless and free from all objects of consciousness, which is
the cause of rebirth.
                    3.17 ) Attainment of the Eye of Truth (Suchness)
When consciousness is neutral to all conditioned states and mindfulness and
wisdom are culminated, it will progress by leaps and bounds in Dhamma, i.e.
attaining the Eye of Truth. Consciousness will automatically attain full
concentration (appan31 samdhi) and an insight-examination process that
takes seven consciousness-moments will take place. The term "attainment
of the Eye of Truth" means that consciousness admits and realizes the truth that
by nature body and mind are impermanent, suffering and not-self. This body
and this mind, once arisen, will naturally vanish. One who admits to heart and
realizes this ultimate truth will feel like a child who has gone astray and found
his parents. Consciousness will take warm and firm refuge in the Triple Gem,
like a man in the middle of an ocean or a man lost in a jungle who knows the
direction to the coast or finds the way out of the jungle. One will have a firm
conviction that one day one will surely get to the coast or come out of the
jungle. Although sometimes consciousness may be swayed by worldly
phenomena or defilements, it still has a stronghold, which prevents it from evils
and misconduct when overcome by defilements and craving. The merit of
attaining the Eye of Truth is that it is regarded as a wholesome immediacy. The

                                           140


Stream-Winner (Sotpanna) is perpetually safe from rebirth in lower worlds. It
is beneficial both in the present and in the future. It is a great benefit resulting
from training in wisdom. So great is the attainment that the Buddha declared it
to be of a greater value than being a universal monarch. be very joyful within
itself and without having to rely on external sensual pleasure. The existence of
this joy is beyond imagination of most human beings. The joyful feeling after
renunciation of sensual craving is so overwhelm

                     3.18 ) Realization of Nibbna
This is to explain that previously, consciousness felt that the knower was a good
and miraculous thing, and took it as a secure refuge. However, when wisdom
through insight development is culminated, keen insight into the Noble Truths
will flash forth. It will realize that the five Aggregates, including knowing
consciousness, are impermanent, unsatisfactory and not-self (Insight into the
Three Characteristics of Existence flashes forth from comprehension of only
one of the characteristics, and the mind will relinquish attachment to
consciousness). After realizing the truth, striving to condition a natural
phenomenon against the law of nature, i.e. striving to make the Aggregates
happy and a self will cease. Consciousness will no longer hold to Mind and
Matter nor grasp at them to burden and oppress consciousness any more. Nor
will Mind and Matter be formed in a new process of becoming (bhava).

                                          141


After developing insight to the point that the mind penetrates the Noble Truths
with clear comprehension of suffering, consciousness will relinquish abandon
the Aggregates. It will be detached from the Aggregates and liberated from
cankers (sava) that confine and conceal consciousness, like a chick
forcing a way out of the eggshell. That is the end of study in Buddhism. Rebirth
and existence have ceased. Fulfilled is the holy life. The remaining lifetime is
totally miraculous because the Aggregates still perform their functions, but
consciousness is independent of the Aggregates. There is no more oppression
on consciousness. Although it continues to perform various functions, i.e.
perception and mental formation, it feels like doing nothing. Every function is
purely an action. Consciousness penetrates bliss that is far beyond thought and
imagination. It is extreme happiness that is free, transparent, light, clean and
clear, boundless, more spacious than the sky and air and more blissful that the
most blissful. This type of consciousness is what the Higher Doctrine
(Adhidhamma) refers to as "functional consciousness". Ajahn Mun referred to it
as, "persisting citta" ("thiticitta"). Luang Pu Dune referred to it as "one citta".
Luang Pu Thate referred to it as "heart". Ajahn Buddhadasa referred to as the
"Essence of Mind", and Luang Pu Budda referred to it as the "single citta". The
reason is that it will forever be one and never be two again. Never again will it
be deluded with dualistic perception, such as joy/suffering, good/evil, etc.

                                         142


Once consciousness is liberated from cankers, which have confined it, and is
independent, "one citta" will realize Nibbna, which is "One Dhamma".
Nibbna is a condition that is pure, clean and clear, immaculate, empty,
formless, boundless, luminous, sublimely blissful and immortal. The
consciousness that penetrates Nibbna will be overwhelmed with extreme
happiness. To compare sensual pleasure and tranquility from absorptions
(jhna) with the bliss from realization of Nibbna, the distinguishable
characteristics are that the sensual pleasure with which human beings are
familiar is a kind confined to consciousness at the chest and tranquility from
absorptions is pleasant and permeating through every pore; whereas that
tranquility of Nibbna is overwhelming to the sky and air and boundless. No
molecule can escape the permeation of that feeling. The bliss from realization of
Nibbna is attained through several approaches. Common to all noble
individuals is penetration of Nibbna at the moment of realizing the path and
the fruition (ariya-magga and ariya-phala), but it happens for a very short time.
Consciousness belonging to the path (ariya-magga) at each level exists for only
one consciousness-moment and consciousness belonging to the fruition (ariya-
phala) exists only for a few consciousness-moments. In addition, consciousness
will be able to fully penetrate Nibbna only by consciousness belonging to
the fruition (phala-citta) because there is no further task to be accomplished.
Consciousness belonging to the path (magga-citta) is supermundane resultant

                                           143


consciousness (lokuttara vipka citta). During the moment of enlightenment that
consciousness belonging to the path (magga-citta) flashes, consciousness must
perform the function of eradicating subtle defilements. Thus, consciousness
belonging to the path (magga-citta) is supermundane moral consciousness
(lokuttara kusala citta) that still has a task to accomplish. It is not idle to fully
permeate and appreciate the tranquility of Nibbna as it does during the
moments of consciousness belonging to fruition (phala-citta).
                   3.19 ) Successive Steps of Vipassana Knowledge or
Solasa na
1. nmarpapariccheda nn: knowledge of the delimitation of mentality-
materiality
2. Paccayapariggaha nn: knowledge of discerning the conditions of
mentality -materiality
3.Sammasana nn: knowledge of comprehending mentality -materiality as
impermanent,unsatisfactory and not-self
4. Udayabbaya nn : knowledge of clear realization of the rise and fall
of aggrigates.
5.Bhanga nn: knowledge of dissolution of aggregates.
6. Bhayatpattna nna: knowledge           which perceives the appearances of
aggregates as terror.

                                     144


7.dnavanupassan nn: knowledge of danger inherent in the aggregates
and danger of attachment to the self.
8.Nibbida nn: knowledge of dispassion and boredom with the
aggregates that rise and fall nothing except the everlasting flow of rising
and falling , nothing except suffering
9.Muccitukayat nn: Knowledge of very strong desire for deliverance
10. Patisankha nn : Knowledge of reflective contemplation to find the
way of escape
11. Sankharupekk nn : Knowledge of equanimity towards all
formations, finally finding the escape from suffering, acknowledging the
law of cause and effect , stopping the push and pull of the fruits of
karma, abandoning rejection of the rise and fall of aggregates, remaining
equanimous, being neither covetous nor dissatisfied towards all
phenomena. This knowledge will not lead to creating new causes .
12.Anuloma nn: After observing continuously the incessant rising -
falling wave , up to a certain point, suddenly all feelings move to the
conscious element at the heart which is the main door of all perceptions
and consciousness. One feels as if there is a strong pressure over the
heart, so suffocating that b one can hardly breathe. After a while , there
are mental formations arising and falling away- three times for people
with moderate wisdom , two times for those with stronger wisdom. This

                                      145


is a special type of rising and falling pattern, as it happens and falls
apart much more quickly than usual...rising - falling , rising-falling ,
rising-falling, suddenly the continuity of rising-falling flow of aggregates
comes to an end.
13. Gotrabh nn: Mental state at the moment of the " Change- of -
lineage" The mind is release from the gravity of bhava( the state of
being) to the state of non rising and non - falling ( it transcends all kinds
of dualism)
14. Magga nn: The state of mind is Nibbana. There is no formation of
thoughts. Felters and destroyed according to the power of the wisdom of
the path.
15. Phala nn : Mental state which during the mind continues
experiencing Nibbana for two or three instants.
16. Paccavekhana nn : The cessation of aggregates can be grasped only
by those who have already reached that state . Paccavekhana nana is the
knowledge occurring after the cessation , when the rising and falling of
aggregates reappears again. One begins to review all previous processes of
being and becoming, how many lives, how many births , how many
aeon have passed without experiencing the termination of aggregates. "
Whatever is of the nature to arise , all that is of the nature to ( cease )"
      When the moment of attaining Nibbana has passed .Bhavangacitta

                                      146


nana occur. This is the knowledge that contemplates and reviews the
enlightenment process, i.e. The characteristics of Maggacitta, Plalacitta,
Nibana. It reconsiders the fetters already destroyed and the remaining or
yet to be eradicated fetters. As for those who attain Arahantship, there is
no need to contemplate the remaining defilements as they have been
completely eradicated. No single particle of fetters or mental fermentation
of defilement remains to destroyed.

                   3.20 ) Conclusion for practicing Vipassana Meditation

                         3.20.1) Observe the five precepts ( Sila ) :Sila
watches over and nurtures the practice in the same way as parents look
after their children. Maintaining moral restrain means not only to avoid
harming others but also to help and encourage them. At the very least
you should maintain the five precepts which are:

            a) Not only to kill or deliberately harm others, but also to
spread goodwill towards all beings.

            b) To be honest, refraining from infringing on the rights of
others, in others words, not stealing.

            c) Knowing moderation in sexual relations: Moderation is the
best way , just one partner is enough.

                                         147


            d) To be honest in speech - this is also the tool for eradicating
defilements. You must be honest and straight, truthful and upright.

            e) To refrain from taking intoxicants.

                   3.20.2.) Practice Samatha to make the mind happy
and peaceful

If your mind become restless, you should practice Samatha , observe the
breath , when you breathing in " Bud" and breathing out " Dho ".This is the
first type of Samadhi called aramma-n'upanijjhana, the first kind of samadhi.

                   3.20.3.) Practice your mind to a stable mind , your
mind will be a knower

       Next we will practice our mind to the knower , and become the
stable mind which see the phenomena arisen up and fall by itself. This
samadhi is called It is called characteristic-examination
(lakkha-n'upanijjhana). This samadhi is one that is stable in the sense that it
remains separate from phenomena. It allows us to see the true characteristics
of body and mind, of mental and physical phenomena (rupa-nama). We may see
the body is not us but is just matter, or the working of elements,

                                      148


      How to practice to stable mind

      a.)We begin just like we practicing Samatha , we focus on the object
which are the breath . Breathing    in " Bud ", breathing out " Dho ".

But now , we emphasize on the mind who know the breath not only the
breath like we practice Samatha . This time we compare the mind to the
foreground and the breath is turn to the background. We will observe two
thing both the mind who know the breath and the breath too. We will
observe the foreground more than the background. And when the mind go
off to think , you should know that. The knower will arisen up by itself
when we know each time that our mind go off to think . When we know ,
the mind that go off to think will fallen and the knower will be arisen
up.

      b). Another way to practicing to be the stable mind. When we
practice to observe breathing, we awareness when we breath. We feel the
entire body is breathing, When the body is walking , or sitting or lying
down we awareness the entire body is walking , sitting and lying down
respectively. We feel just like we observe the robot is walking , sitting
and lying down. The body is not us. We only the mind who the observer
observe the body postures.

                                        149


      c). After that we separate matter and mind by we have the mind is
the knower : for this step we will know that the body is a mass of
condition, and the mind is another not the same thing . We will see that the
thought is something another from the mind. The happiness and the
suffering is not the mind either. we will see the truth that the five
aggregates is separate into five parts and each parts are showing the three
characteristic .

      d). Achieve the 16 steps of Vipassana Knowledge.

             3.21 ) Glossary
Defilement -Usually spoken of under the sub-headings of greed ( desire ),
aversion ( fear , anger, sadness, etc.) and delusion ( ignorance of Truth; lack
of wisdom) , these are what taint or cloud the mind incessantly, making it
impure and unable to see things as they are.
Dhamma Practice-Both formal meditation and practice in daily life in
conjunction with Buddhist teaching in order to gain wisdom, see things as
they are and thus liberate from suffering.
Fabrication - Sankhara or mental formations. In this        book, fabrication is
usually referred to unnoticed defilements coming in and creating our

                                        150


delude sense of who we are and our make- believe situation . In some
cases , the meaning of fabrication is merely illusions created by thought.
Mindfulness ; Awareness      of   physical   or  mental  phenomena     .  More
specifically , awareness of what the body is doing in real time, or
recognizing   what   mental   phenomena      or  behaviors   have  just  arisen.
Genuine mindfulness arise automatically as a result of the practitioner's
ability to be aware of the body and to recognize mental phenomena when
they arise.
Nibbana; Nirvana, Enlightenment, the end of suffering, the eradication of
the defilements.
Phenomena - Mental      and    physical    phenomena   . Physical   phenomena
include bodily movements, breathing , bodily positions ( standing, sitting,
lying down) and the like. Mental phenomena are primary mental states,
such as that of thinking, restlessness, or curiosity, emotions, and feelings,
but are primary called phenomena in this book as in their true nature,
such states last only momentarily.
Wisdom; True wisdom in Buddhism is not intellectual knowledge , but
comes from seeing the truth of how things really are through direct
experience. Here it implies seeing at least one of the Three characteristics
of   body   and   mind:   things   are   impermanent ( always    changing )    ,
unsatisfactory ( they don't persist), and they are non-self( not under control).

                                       151


      PART FOUR : ABOUT WAT PA TAM WUA FOREST
MONASTERY

      Wat Pa Tam Wua Forest Monastery offers spiritual guidance to those
who wish to seriously practice meditation in a peaceful and natural monastic
setting. Resting in between beautiful mountains of exotic Mae Hong Son,
Thailand. Capturing green nature, peaceful stream, natural caves and never
ending waterfalls of these spectacular Northern of Thailand.

      It's located 37 kilometres from Mae Hong Son province.Wat Pa Tam Wua
is home to one of the most tranquil monastic heavens of Thailand. A place of

                                        152


meditation, refuge and self - discovery. Tam Wua Forest Monastery is the place
that you can practicing sitting meditation near the waterfall.

      Wat Tam Wua is just like paradise on earth, with beautiful scenery
around with the beautiful wild flowers and orchids, waterfall , streams and
mountains. We offer the spiritual guidance in practicing Vipassana Meditation.
Many practitioners came from many countries around the world came here to
practice meditation. No matter practitioners from the beginners or the advance
level are allowed flexible meditation methods, however , Vipassana or
Mindfulness on Breathing is the main stream of practice here. Proper meditation
instruction, as well as appropriate views on natural laws and

                                         153


phenomena are provided to the lay communities by Thai-English speaking
monks.

      We provide fully accommodation such a single kuties, dormitories, two
vegetarian meals per day with tea, coffee, juice or milk in place of dinner.
Staying at Wat Tam Wua is free of charge to all public who seek practices of
spirituality, however, the sacred grounds must not be viewed as hotels or
resorts. Participants are asked to be discipline in their practice, to follow the
daily schedule, to keep their area tidy and clean.




. Row of single Kuties for Ladies behind the mountain.

154

            155




Practice mindfulness in sweep the leaves



                          our library

                                    156




Contact us:

Wat Pa Tam Wua Forest Monastery

Ban Mae Suya , Huay Pha, Mae Hong Son, 58000

Thailand

Tel. +66(8) 1031 3326, +66(8) 7982 1168

                                         157


How to come here?

From Bangkok:

     By bus : " SOMBAT TOUR" Bangkok-Mae Hong Son

    Tel : 02-792-1444, 02-537-8333

    By Air Plane from Bangkok - Chiengmai : Nok air, Thai airways
    International , Karn Air,Thai lion Air

    By Air plane from chiengmai - Mae Hong Son : Karn Air,Nok Air

From Mae Hong Son Bus station to Wat Tam Wua

    : Prempracha Transport co., Ltd Tel 053-492999

          ----------------------------------------------------------

                                    158


            REFERENCE WORKS IN THAI
1.. . 

2. :.   


3.: 

4. : 

( ..)

 5.:  


            REFERENCE WORKS IN ENGLISH
1. BUDDHISM PLAIN AND SIMPLE : The Practice of Being Aware, Right
Now, Every Day : Steve Hagen

2. ANAPANASATI BHAVANA: BUDDHASA BHIKKHU

3.VIMUTTIDHAMMA : From Chakra to Dhammachakra: Piyadhassi Bhikku

4.The Path to Enlightenment 1: Venerable Luangpor Pramote Pamojjo

                                         159


5. NIBBANA : BUDDHADASA BHIKKHU

6. TOWARDS TRUTH AND WISDOM: AJahn Sumano Bhikkhu

7.MINDFULNESS WITH BREATHING :A Manual for Serious Beginners :
BUDDHADASA BHIKKHU

8.A Meditator's Guide : Venerable Luangpor Pramote Pamojjo Teaches the
Principles of Mindfulness and Meditation

9. CONSIGNED BY LUANGPU : The teachings of Phra Rajvudhacariya

( Luang Pu Dulya Atulo )

                   --------------------------------------------

